The second round draw for the All-Ireland football championship has pitted UIster rivals Armagh and Donegal together for the second time this season following their earlier encounter in the Ulster championship. Mayo will take on Leinster runners-up Kildare while Cork and Limerick form an all-Munster affair. In the round’s other tie, Clare found themselves paired with Roscommon. Monday’s draw also saw the semi-finals of the Tailteann Cup come out of the hat, with Sligo set to face Cavan while Westmeath will take on Offaly. The two knockout clashes will form a Croke Park double-header on June 19th. Donegal have positive recent form against Armagh having knocked them out of Ulster at the quarter-final stage, though they did go on to lose the final against Derry. Armagh are at this point after an upset win over All-Ireland champions Tyrone on the weekend. Mayo saw off Monaghan in the opening round of the qualifiers while Kildare are coming off the back of a resounding defeat to Dublin in the Leinster championship. Clare saw off Meath in the last round while their opponents Roscommon lost out to Galway in the Connacht final. After losing out to Kerry, Limerick take on a Cork outfit that saw off Louth in the opening round. Neutral venues will host all the qualifier matches on the weekend of June 11th-12th. In the Tailteann Cup, Cavan and Sligo square off after beating Fermanagh and Leitrim respectively, the latter in a dramatic penalty shoot-out. Offaly are at the semi-final stage after victory over New York while Westmeath worked their way past Carlow. All-Ireland qualifier second round draw Saturday June 11th Clare vs Roscomon, Croke Park (3.45pm throw-in, live on Sky Sports) Mayo vs Kildare, Croke Park (6pm throw-in, live on Sky Sports) Sunday June 12th Cork vs Limerick, Páirc Uí Chaoimh (1.30pm throw-in, live on RTÉ) Armagh vs Donegal, Clones (4pm throw-in, live on RTÉ) Tailteann Cup semi-final draw Sunday June 19th Sligo vs Cavan, Croke Park (1.45pm throw-in, live on RTÉ) Westmeath vs Offaly, Croke Park (4pm throw-in, live on RTÉ)