Tributes have been paid to a 17-year-old killed in a road traffic collision in Co Cavan, who has been described as a charismatic and kind young man known for helping others. The deceased, named locally as Luke Byrne, had lived in Corlough, Co Cavan. The teenager was seriously injured when a car he was a passenger in collided with a lorry on the N3, near Kilnalack, at about 6pm on Thursday. He was rushed to Cavan General Hospital where he later died. A woman in her 50s and man in his 40s were also taken to the hospital for injuries understood to be serious but non-life threatening. Mr Byrne had recently finished his fifth year in St Mogues College secondary school, Bawnboy, Co Cavan, and was also involved in Corlough GAA club. Anne Conaghan, St Mogues’s principal, described the teenager as an “exceptional young man” who was both academically and athletically gifted. He was part of the school GAA team that won the Ulster Ward Cup back to back in 2019 and 2020 and was described as a “great footballer” by the coach of the school team. He was known in the school as someone always eager to help others. “From first year on when he was finished his work he’d go around and help everybody else. He was always volunteering to help out,” Ms Conaghan told The Irish Times. Last Friday, he had stayed back with a number of other students to help clear out classrooms after exams and also to plant flowers in the school grounds, she said. The teachers in the school recalled the 17-year-old as a “very charismatic and very kind” student, she said. “He never left a classroom without saying thank you or goodbye,” the principal said. The teenager had plans to study physiotherapy after school, she said. The Byrne family were very close and he had an older sister who is currently studying in England. “Our hearts are broken for them,” she said. “He was an amazing young man, [it is] just a dreadful loss to the whole community.” Fr Seán Maguire, parish priest, said “the rural, close-knit community of Corlough is numb with sadness today and our thoughts and prayers are with the Byrne family and his friends at this time”. Fianna Fáil councillor John Paul Feeley said the death of the teenager was “such a tragic event” and his prayers were with the family “on this very sad day”.