Considering much of the conversation out of Armagh after defeating All-Ireland champions Tyrone in Sunday’s first round of the football qualifiers was their desire to make some amends for their poor showing against Donegal, perhaps it was only fitting they get another chance at them now. Seven weeks after that Ulster quarter-final meeting in Ballybofey, which Donegal won relatively easily 1-16 to 0-12, Armagh will again meet their Ulster rivals in the second round, that being the standout fixture this Sunday, this time set for the neutral ground of Clones (4.0pm). It’s another all-division one clash too, the second round also featuring Kildare, though relegated this season, against division one opposition too in Mayo. They famously met in the third rounds of 2018 football qualifiers against the backdrop of the Newbridge or Nowhere campaign, Kildare winning 0-21 to 0-19. This time they also meet on neutral ground, that game part of a double-bill in Croke Park on Saturday (6.0pm), along Roscommon against Clare (3.45pm) The remaining second-round fixture will see Cork take on Munster neighbours and beaten provincial finalists Limerick, that game fixed for Páirc Uí Chaoimh, based on the home-away agreement between the counties. Repeat pairings were allowed for round two of the qualifiers, the meeting of Armagh and Donegal, the beaten Ulster finalists, set up as another intriguing battle. “You’re playing a provincial loser, so you’re playing a team that has got into a provincial final,” Armagh coach Kieran Donaghy said ahead of the Donegal draw. “They’ve had two weeks to regroup after the loss; there are good teams in there. But we fancy ourselves as a good team as well.” It also means two teams who either played in division two or have gained promotion (Limerick) will be set for a place in the All-Ireland quarter-final draw, softening up things perhaps for two of the provincial champions. The Tailteann Cup semi-final draw also presented a local derby, Westmeath and Offaly playing in Croke Park on Sunday week, the semi-final to feature Cavan and Sligo. The two Preliminary senior hurling quarter-finals are in Corrigan Park Belfast and Tralee, Antrim hosting Cork, and Kerry hosting Wexford, both games on Saturday. Upcoming GAA fixtures Saturday All-Ireland SFC Qualifiers round 2: Roscommon v Clare, Croke Park, 3.45pm - Sky Sports; Kildare v Mayo, Croke Park, 6pm - Sky Sports All-Ireland SHC preliminary quarter-finals: Antrim v Cork, Corrigan Park, Belfast, 2pm; Kerry v Wexford, Austin Stack Park, 2pm All-Ireland MFC quarter-fiinals: Tyrone v Kerry, Portlaoise, 4pm; Cork v Derry, Portlaoise, 6pm Sunday All-Ireland SFC Qualifiers round 2: Cork v Limerick, Pairc Ui Chaoimh, 1.30pm – RTE; Armagh v Donegal, Clones, 4pm - RTE Sunday June 19th – Tailteann Cup semi-finals: Westmeath v Offaly, Croke Park, 4pm - RTE; Sligo v Cavan, Croke Park, 1.45pm - RTE