Government TDs and Senators have said Ireland needs a “proper debate” on defence and security following comments by the Taoiseach about the future of Irish defence policy. On Wednesday, Micheál Martin said Ireland would not need to hold a referendum to join Nato, and that while such a move is not envisaged he told reporters there was a need to “reflect on military non-alignment in Ireland and our military neutrality”. Fianna Fáil Senator Malcolm Byrne said on Thursday that there was a need for a “proper debate on Ireland’s defence and security”. “This is not a debate about joining Nato, and it is far too simplistic to paint it as such,” he said. His view was shared by Charlie Flanagan, who previously held both the Justice and Foreign Affairs briefs. “Whatever about the constitutional legalities of joining Nato, the fact is it’s currently a theoretical argument. We can’t join Nato as Nato wouldn’t have us.” He said it was now time to “intensify” our relations with EU colleagues around security and defence. The aftermath of the invasion of Ukraine by Russia has seen dramatic reversals in the security policies of several EU member states, including Germany, which has significantly increased defence spending, and Norway and Sweden, who have begun the process of Nato membership. Government parties here have been pushing for renewed emphasis on the topic, especially after a critical review of Ireland’s defence capacities from the Commission on the Defence Forces was published earlier this year. “At 0.28% GDP we are not only the lowest in the EU but the lowest by a country kilometre. We currently spend €1 billion. This must increase to €2 billion in October. Having a ‘national conversation’ is all very fine, but we must have some capacity to safeguard our people and territory. The Cork fisherman debacle earlier in the year was a national embarrassment,” said Mr Flanagan. Mr Byrne predicted that Ireland would face an increasing number of cyberattacks, many of them “state-sponsored or state-condoned”, and that the country was not prepared. Additionally, he criticised Ireland’s conventional defence capacities, including the absence of adequate radar detection capabilities. “Are we happy that we rely on the RAF to help defend Irish air space?” “The Taoiseach is correct that we need a considered debate on security and defence. It needs to take it questions around the energy security, data security, food security. This debate is not about joining Nato, though in any discussions on a reunified Ireland that question will have to be addressed.”