The sports software company co-founded by former Ireland rugby player Andrew Trimble has raised £500,000 (€579,770) from Whiterock Finance as it seeks to expand in global markets. Kairos Sports Tech, which helps elite sports teams and athletes manage their schedules, keep track of training sessions and provides communication channels, said it plans to create a number of new jobs to support the growth. The financing was provided by Whiterock, a locally-owned fund manager operating in Northern Ireland since 2012, through its growth finance fund that contributes to a larger amount secured as part of a recent fundraise. The company, which was founded by Mr Trimble and Belfast-based entrepreneur Gareth Quinn in 2018, currently employs 18 people. It launched in 2021 and opened an office in the United States last year. The new jobs will be created in Belfast, the US, Australia and across Europe as Kairos targets significant global expansion. “We’ve seen huge growth globally at Kairos over the last few years, which really validates an exceptional and best in class platform that can be used by elite teams worldwide in any sport,” Mr Trimble, the company’s chief executive, said. “We’re delighted to partner with Whiterock Finance as we look to further solidify our status as the market leading platform in elite sport.” The company already works with a number of high-profile sports teams, including Premier League, NBA, MLB, MLS, and Premiership Rugby teams. Last year, it raised £1.5 million (€1.7 million) in funding to bankroll its expansion plans, with Techstart leading the round. It was also accepted on to the US Techstars Sports Accelerator programme last year. “Utilising their combined experience, Andrew and Gareth have created an innovative software solution for a competitive market,” said James Thompson of Whiterock Finance. “Since launching their product in January 2021 they have secured contracts with well-known elite sports teams across the world, which reflects the company’s potential for global growth. We’re excited to support Kairos as they work to expand their team and extend their impressive global success to date.”