Dublin Airport management has said it is not seeking external help as passenger queues on Saturday morning were flowing through security channels without incident. As numbers hover around 95 per cent of pre-pandemic levels, and with no sign of a fall-off in holiday enthusiasm, the capital’s airport will see 50,000 people flying out and 45,000 coming in on Saturday. “We haven’t asked for any help,” said spokesman Graeme McQueen. “I think what we have learned over the last few weeks is that we need contingencies in our system which we have given ourselves.” Mr McQueen was speaking a day after Minister for Transport Eamon Ryan conceded the drafting of army personnel was among various options being considered to help a depleted airport staff cope with any future crises. In late May, a surge in travel combined with low staff numbers led to lengthy pre-departure queues and large numbers of missed flights. On Saturday morning, however, there seemed little immediate prospect of that. Processing times through security gates were, in the main, kept below 30 minutes since the busy early morning wave of departures. The successful contingency plans referenced by Mr McQueen include the recent segregation of people queuing up for security and bag-drop respectively. Additional outside queuing areas were not required early on Saturday morning, as the airport braced itself for the single busiest travel weekend since Covid all but shut down the sector just over two years ago. Marquees erected in the event of serious pressure have remained largely unused, save for a handful of half-hour periods, the authority has said. With staffing problems still at the heart everything, management said another 100 people are currently in training to add further backup. Efforts are focused on avoiding a necessity to cancel flights as has happened in other European airports. While things appeared to be running smoothly at the start of the weekend, experiences gauged via social media were mixed. DAA continued to field questions and complaints from passengers. “Dublin Airport chaotic today,” one person tweeted on Friday. “Massive queues earlier — about 1.5 hours — to check in (i wasn’t able to do it online). 40 mins at security which isn’t the worse — then huge queue in T2 eating area.” “Never again will I go through @DublinAirport,” posted another, appearing to reflect ongoing general staffing problems. “No customer services, unorganised hell, no help, horrendous waiting times at check in and security, lost luggage staff no idea what to do.” Another, posting a picture from the sky, said that despite “a lot of negativity about @DublinAirport, must say I had a quick and pleasant experience flying out and arriving back”. Much of the online complaints have moved from queue times to luggage issues. These problems have been put down to individual airlines, also believed to be coping with staff shortages, and not Authority staff. “The airport may be running better upstairs but the baggage carnage remains,” one person tweeted. “For tourists and visitors to our country a little notice stuck to the wall saying you have access to missing bags between 2-4pm is misleading.” One passenger desperately appealed for information on a lost wedding ring, left behind in a Terminal 1 security tray.