Under 21 European Championships qualifier: Italy v Republic of Ireland, Stadio Cino e Lillo Del Duca, Ascoli, 4.30pm – Live RTÉ2 Conor Coventry watched Rory McIlroy capture the Canadian Open on Sunday night with an inspirational eight-under-par final round. “I seen his interview as well,” noted the Ireland captain of McIlroy refusing to shy away from Greg Norman. “Big fan of his.” More of the same is needed in Ascoli. Far more important than the senior match in Poland, the curtain raiser on this unique Tuesday offers Coventry the chance to lead Irish football into the unknown. The under-21s have never qualified for a major tournament. Do what Italy did to them in Tallaght last November and the road to next year’s Euros in Georgia and Romania opens before them. “No pressure on us,” said Coventry. “It’s all on them. They will be under big pressure from their media and people to win the group. We obviously want to achieve that as well but there is more pressure on them. That can only help us.” The West Ham water carrier embodies the attitude of the modern Irish player. Pure belief is surging through Jim Crawford’s team but victory here would be beyond most people’s wildest dreams. Italy have breezed through Group F unbeaten, with a minor stumble in Sweden last week leaving the door ajar for Ireland to catch them at the finish line. Coventry – the record Irish cap-holder at under 21 level and a solid bet to reappear as a senior international – has no problem walking the walk, bringing a muscular edge throughout the campaign. “Played them a few times,” he continued. “Four World Cups, very comfortable on the ball, even though it was 2-0il in Tallaght, it was a close game and we believe we can get the win.” Ireland are in serious form since that defeat, completely recovering from earlier stumbles in Luxembourg and Montenegro, with a thrilling four-match winning streak that included the double over Sweden. That Crawford is putting a decent team on the pitch at all is an achievement, considering the number of players already promoted to Stephen Kenny’s senior squad; Gavin Bazunu, Festy Ebosele, Andrew Omobamidele, Nathan Collins, Adam Idah, Troy Parrott, Michael Obafemi and Jason Knight did not pass go. What’s even more remarkable is the competition for places with Evan Ferguson, JJ Kayode and Mipo Odubeko in a three-way battle to lead the line. One from Bundesliga midfielder Conor Noss and UCD flyer Liam Kerrigan could be held in reserve. Should Italy win or draw, Ireland have a playoff in September, which indicates that Kenny might decide to leave the current squad well alone despite the soaring form of Will Smallbone; 17-year-old Ferguson is another bursting with potential. By then, both might be playing Premier League football for Southampton and Brighton. Who knows what the future holds, but Coventry is on the money – Ireland have nothing to lose and everything to gain in Ascoli. IRELAND (possible): Maher; O’Connor, Cashin, McGuinness, Adaramola; O’Connor, Coventry, Kilkenny, Wright; Smallbone, Noss/Kerrigan; Ferguson/Kayode/Mipo. ITALY (possible): Plizzari; Okoli, Lovato, Pirola; Cambiaso, Bove, Ricci, Rovella, Parisi; Pellegri, Camibaghi. Referee: Gergo Bogár (Hungary).