Labour have accused Boris Johnson of riding roughshod over ethics rules after Downing Street failed to deny that he had considered appointing his wife to government positions. Mr Johnson’s official spokesman said that Carrie Johnson’s name had not been put forward for any posts but would not say if the prime minister had considered the idea. The Times reported last week that when he was foreign secretary and not yet married to Mrs Johnson, Mr Johnson had sought to appoint her to a £100,000 a year role as his chief of staff. The newspaper removed the story from later editions and from its website after Downing Street contacted editors but has not published a correction or retraction. The Daily Mirror reported this week that the prime minister had discussed roles in a prize run by Prince William and at the COP26 climate summit in Glasgow for his wife. His spokesman said on Tuesday that Mr Johnson had not “recommended” his wife for the roles but did not deny that it had been discussed. “The prime minister has never recommended Mrs Johnson for a government role, or one as part of the Earthshot Prize. Beyond that I wouldn’t get into any conversations the prime minister may or may not have had in private,” the spokesman said. The prime minister’s ethics adviser Christopher Geidt, who resigned last week saying he had been put in an “odious” position, was reported to have said the attempt to give the future Mrs Johnson a job in the foreign office was ripe for investigation. Labour’s deputy leader Angela Rayner noted that Downing Street had not confirmed that Lord Geidt would be replaced. “It’s pretty clear that if the prime minister had his way, he would dispense with the nuisance of transparency and the annoyance of accountability altogether,” she said. Ms Rayner was speaking in the House of Commons during a debate on Labour’s motion calling for a parliamentary committee to be given the power to appoint a new ethics adviser if the prime minister failed to do so. The committee would also be able to investigate possible breaches of the ministerial code. “We’ll give them the proper powers to launch investigations, to send for papers, persons and records, to report on breaches and to make their judgments public. This prime minister has ridden roughshod over the rules. He won’t show any regard to ethics. But this House can today,” Ms Rayner said. Cabinet office minister Michael Ellis said the government was considering how to ensure oversight and scrutiny of ministerial interests following Lord Geidt’s resignation. “The process of managing ministerial interests continues in line with the ministerial code, which sets out that the permanent secretary in the department and the Cabinet Office can provide advice and have a role in scrutinising interests,” he said. “The PM intends to appoint a new ethics adviser. We will announce how that is to be done, and who it is and how it works, in due course.”