Formations, tactics and style are changeable entities in the natural life of an international team. Stephen Kenny’s Ireland being a case in point after altering a seemingly cemented 3-4-2-1 to spring 3-5-2, and crucially two strikers, upon a Scottish outfit widely expected to leave Dublin with three points. Goals and assists from man of the match Michael Obafemi and Troy Parrott spikes the stock of these young centre forwards while releasing the pressure valve on their manager. “Well, we did change our system,” said Kenny. “We obviously played 3-5-2 as opposed to 3-4-2-1 so there was a tactical change. Not everything was perfect. We have had better passages of play in other games and not scored. “It was a tactical decision that we felt was right for this match. Michael and Troy came in. We just felt it was right for this match. Obviously we didn’t score in the last two games so we needed to score and make sure we carried a real attacking threat all the time. “It wasn’t perfect. We are still a work in progress. We practised playing like that for the first five days of this camp because it is new for us and we know the 3-4-2-1 very well. Goals make such a difference.” Goals by natural born strikers, Obafemi and Parrott, who had previously struggled to make the line-up or found themselves positioned away from the action, heaped fresh misery on Scotland. Kenny also decided to deny Scotland the run of midfield by putting Jason Knight alongside Jayson Molumby in front of Josh Cullen, who was already protecting the back three. “I know what I am doing,” said Kenny, almost as a reminder for those who lost faith following 1-0 defeats to Armenia and Ukraine. “We were on a great run and we had setbacks this week which really hurt us but the players have absolute conviction in the group in terms of their emergence. “There were some good players missing today. We can continue to try and improve. There is a really radical shift in terms of the players we have brought through. It is really exciting for the public to identify with them and to identify with an exciting style of play.” The focus turns to facing a much stronger Ukraine outfit, than the largely domestic side fielded by Oleksandr Petrakov last Wednesday, with Kenny faced with remaining competitive in Group 1 without skipper Séamus Coleman, Matt Doherty, Gavin Bazunu, Chiedozie Ogbene and possibly Obafemi. The Swansea City player pulled up with a groin injury after his stunning strike made it 3-0. “We have got a few injuries so we have some selection dilemmas,” said Kenny. “My mind has moved on to Ukraine already. Shane Duffy is suspended and we don’t know if John Egan will be right. [ Michael Obafemi’s screamer caps memorable first Nations League win for Ireland ] [ Irish player ratings against Scotland ] “I think we are an emerging team that will improve and get better,” he added. “Adam Idah and Andrew Omobamdiele are not there at the moment, “The Irish support really believe in this team, I feel. They know we are not perfect. They know we have imperfections. “This was the most significant home victory in a competitive game since Bosnia in 2015, so the players can enjoy this with their family because it is the most significant home victory in sevens years.” The travelling Tartan Army was understandably disgusted to be the nation that releases Kenny’s Ireland from an ever tightening vice-grip. All the miserable records, no Nations League wins, no competitive victory at home in three years, a widening run of no goals, instantly become distant memories. “They spent a lot of money to travel and we appreciate that,” said Scotland manager Steve Clarke. “Hopefully the next time they travel and spend a lot of money we can be better, we can be good for them and give them the kind of results we have had over the past couple of years.”