A political row has broken out over a “heartless” decision by the Dutch government to fire Afghan nationals who had worked at its embassy in Kabul – some for as long as 20 years – and who were evacuated to the Netherlands when the Taliban recaptured the country last August. Not only have the 37 workers who escaped with their families been told they’ve lost their government jobs – but they’ve also been told they will have to use some of the severance settlements they receive to pay for their accommodation in refugee centres. The Spark Foundation, an NGO that has been helping the relocated Afghans, condemned the Dutch government’s position as an unacceptable example of decisions being taken on the basis of “systems” rather than the needs of individual human beings. “The system is all-important and the refugees are coming a poor second place,” said Yannick Du Pont of Spark. “Four or five different organisations have partial responsibility for making their situation work but nobody is doing it. They are the ball in a political game.” Labour MP, Kati Piri, described the way the Afghans were being treated as “heartless” – and said she’d be taking it up with the foreign affairs ministry and with the refugee settlement agency, COA. “I am angry about this. It shows no moral awareness whatsoever. We owe a debt of honour to these people. They worked for the Dutch government and we brought them here in a crisis. The government must reverse this decision immediately.” There’s also been criticism of the way the Afghans have been treated since they arrived, moved from their original accommodation to a new location and then back again, before being separated and sent to refugee centres around the country. “Some have been moved six times,” says Du Pont. “They’ve had to give up jobs and cancel language classes and driving lessons so that they can move. In all, I know of 14 people who’ve accepted jobs and then lost them again since they arrived here.” According to the ministry of foreign affairs, the “former embassy staff” were informed as long ago as spring 2021 that their employment would be terminated if the Kabul embassy closed or was scaled down. It says they were told later in the Netherlands that they would be entitled to a “transition payment”, but that in the case of individuals with resources of €6,505 or families with €13,010, they would be expected to pay a contribution to their board and lodging. “These are people who were glad to be here and determined to start a new life with that money,” says du Pont. “Some planned to start their own businesses. That will be impossible now.”