Investigators are confident the retired English couple found death in their home in south Co Tipperary this week did not suffer physical violence. However, despite the completion of post-mortem examinations the causes of the deaths are still unclear and gardaí are still waiting on toxicology reports to aid in their investigation. It is believed the bodies may have lain undiscovered for as long as 18 months The team investigating the deaths of Nicholas Smith (81) and Hilary Smith (79) at their home near Cloneen were continuing to interview locals on Friday, and to liaise with police forces in the UK and France where the couple may have lived. [ Social Affairs Tipperary deaths: ‘They made it clear from the outset they didn’t want to be invited in for tea’ ] [ Tipperary deaths: Gardaí contact British police in effort to identify relatives of couple found dead in home ] Gardaí have already made contact with British police through Interpol in an attempt to trace their next of kin who are believed to still be living in the UK. It is understood that Mr Smith spoke to one neighbour soon after arriving in the area around a decade ago and told them that he had a brother in the UK. However, he said he did not know where his sibling lived as they had not spoken for more than 20 years. There is also evidence the couple may have lived in France, and gardaí are pursing this line of investigation. The post-mortems have shown no signs of violent injury and appeared to rule out the possibility that either person suffered an assault before their death. There was no sign of forced entry to the house. One line of inquiry is the couple died of carbon-monoxide poisoning. The date on milk cartons found in the house indicated they may have died in late 2020. Investigators have also been looking at bank statements belonging to the couple. While their pensions were paid into a bank account automatically and utilities were covered by standing orders, gardaí hope other activity might give an indication of when the couple died.