Minister for Foreign Affairs Simon Coveney has warned that the European Union’s position on the Northern Ireland Protocol has “hardened” in the face of the UK threat to unilaterally scrap part of the arrangements. Speaking on his way into cabinet this morning, Mr Coveney backed up comments by the Taoiseach, saying that if the UK government pushes ahead with the planned legislation, it would represent a “new low” in British-Irish relations since the Belfast Agreement was signed. “My message to the British government is a very clear one: if you are genuinely interested in negotiated solutions to these problems… well then let’s see some evidence as to a willingness to negotiate seriously those solutions through compromise, through flexibility.” He said the European Commission had shown flexibility and wants to do more, but “needs a partner” to do so. Mr Coveney urged the UK government to step back from its plan to publish domestic legislation that would override elements of the protocol, which governs trade between Britain and Northern Ireland post-Brexit. “Publishing this legislation will cause a lot more problems than it solves, not just between Britain and Ireland but between the UK and the EU more generally,” Mr Coveney told reporters. “In many ways from my experience, and I’ve been to Finland to Sweden to Estonia to Latvia, and I’ve been speaking to many other EU foreign ministers, in many ways in the last number of weeks the EU position has hardened because I don’t think there’s a single capital across the EU and anybody in the European Commission that believes, at the moment anyway, that the British government is serious about a negotiated solution, because there is no signal coming from London that they are. “Instead all of the signals are about unilateral action, making demands with no willingness to compromise, and that has hardened the EU response to what they’re seeing coming out of London now. [ UK delays Bill to unilaterally scrap parts of NI protocol ] [ Newton Emerson: Donaldson finds himself hoist on DUP petard ] “So, we need to find a way to arrest this rot in relationships and instead to look to compromise, to negotiation, to dialogue, to solve what are genuine issues and concerns.” On Wednesday, the British prime minister Boris Johnson denied the Government had failed to consult one of its senior legal advisers over plans to unilaterally scrap elements of the protocol. Mr Johnson rejected the claim that first treasury counsel James Eadie, the government’s independent barrister on major legal issues, had not been asked to give a view on whether the bill due to be tabled at Westminster would breach international law. Answering an urgent question on the issue in the Commons on Thursday, foreign office minister James Cleverly refused to directly say whether James Eadie was consulted on the plans, citing a convention not to discuss legal advice given to government. However, Mr Cleverly insisted the government was “confident” that its proposals are legal. “The Government is confident that our actions are lawful under international law and in line with longstanding convention that we do not set out internal legal deliberations,” he said. On a visit to Trinity College in Dublin, British Labour party leader Keir Starmer claimed Boris Johnson was too distracted by his own leadership travails to focus on the protocol impasse. “Of course there are challenges with the protocol, but I think that we have faced much greater challenges than that in our shared history and I think that with flexibility on both sides, with good faith, statecraft, and trust around the negotiating table, we can deal with the remaining issues,” he said. “My concern is that we have a Prime Minister who doesn’t have those attributes. Trust is very important in all of this and this Prime Minister does not have the trust, or I fear he doesn’t have the trust, to negotiate in the way that I actually think would lead to a solution to the problems. “We’ve faced bigger problems than this. With good faith, statecraft and trust around the negotiating table, which is what a Labour government would bring, these problems can be overcome. But a prime minister without those attributes taking a wrecking ball to the relationship is not going to help anybody.” Earlier former taoiseach John Bruton said any move by Britain to override the Northern Ireland Protocol would be “gravely serious” and would set a would set a “dreadful precedent” in international relations, “Remember we are at war. There is a war taking place in Ukraine because Russia is breaking a treaty guaranteeing the territorial integrity of Ukraine. And Britain is supporting Ukraine in that And yet at the very same time they are proposing to break a treaty concerning their nearest neighbour Ireland and the European Union which they freely negotiated and indeed which was endorsed in the Conservative party manifesto of 2019 where it was described as a ‘great new deal.’ Boris Johnson said there would be no more re negotiation. Now he wants to not just re negotiate it. He wants to break it,” the former Fine Gael leader told RTÉ’s Morning Ireland, Mr Bruton indicated that the EU cannot ignore what is happening in the UK parliament because the proposals being made on the protocol would destroy the single market. He said certain elements in the UK parliament also want Northern Ireland to have access to the EU Single Market without any EU rules on state aid. “They (also) want no jurisdiction for the European Court of Justice in interpreting EU rules as applied in Northern Ireland. That would mean the uniformity of the Single Market as far as rules are concerned is essential to it would be diluted. You would have one set of EU rules for Northern Ireland and another set of EU rules for the 27 member States.” Mr Bruton described the issues at stake as being “quite serious.” “If for example you had pathogens introduced in food in to Northern Ireland and not checked at the ports in Northern Ireland, and some of those foods were incorporated in Irish exports you could have a major food scandal damaging the Irish food industry potentially terminally as a result of lack of controls. [ Newton Emerson: Donaldson finds himself hoist on DUP petard ] “These are deeply destructive proposals that the British are making and they know perfectly well what they are doing. This is not something that was sprung on them. " Mr Bruton was speaking as the British government delayed until next week a Bill to unilaterally scrap parts of the Northern Ireland protocol amid a last-minute disagreement over what form it should take and concerns about the position of the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP). Prime minister Boris Johnson has yet to decide whether the legislation should itself disapply the protocol’s central elements or only give ministers the power to do so. The British government hopes that publishing the Bill will persuade the DUP to agree to elect a speaker for the Northern Ireland Assembly as a first step towards restoring the Stormont institutions. But The Irish Times understands that the party will not elect a speaker if the British government introduces a Bill that offers ministers discretion about whether to override the protocol. Government sources in Dublin said they had received no advance warning from Downing Street about the British government’s intentions yesterday, underlining the freeze in relations between Dublin and London over the protocol. Speaking to the European Parliament in Strasbourg on Wednesday ,Mr Martin stepped up his criticism of Boris Johnson’s government, telling MEPs that the proposed British legislation would be a “historic low point” which would signal a “disregard for essential principles of laws, which are the foundation of international relations” and would “quite literally, be to the benefit of absolutely no one”. DUP leader Jeffrey Donaldson said he was disappointed by the Taoiseach’s remarks, telling the House of Lords subcommittee on the protocol that the Irish Government was indifferent to unionist concerns. “They are tone deaf to concerns to unionists. They don’t get it and if they do they ignore it,” he told the subcommittee regarding the protocol. Mr Donaldson said he feels like a second class citizen arising out of he protocol proposals. He spoke about those who are trying to create an all island economy - an economy which he says does not exist. Mr Bruton said there was “no validity” in the comments made by Mr Donaldson. “Northern Ireland remains fully part of the United Kingdom for purposes of sovereignty, for purposes of military , for purposes of the service industry. All the protocol is dealing with is a very small part of the economy, which is the goods economy. In modern times services are far more important than goods. Because we have a land border, and with Jeffrey Donaldson’s support Northern Ireland is leaving the European Union, we have to find some way of managing to ensure that what happens in Northern Ireland doesn’t damage the single market of the European Union which is of vital national interest for us. But also to do the best we can to give businesses that are on this island of Ireland but in Northern Ireland privilege to access the EU market.” Mr Bruton said the protocol would encourage investment in Northern Ireland rather than in the mainland of Britain. “As it will have access to the EU market as well as to the UK market. That is a massive advantage for Jeffrey Donaldson’s constituents. It could be argued that it solidifies the Union rather than the opposite. But Jeffrey Donaldson seems to me not to understand the economic interests of his constituents and is putting a purely abstract constitutional point in place of practical reality.” Mr Bruton added that the Belfast Agreement brokered 24 years ago has “never completely worked.” “The east/west dimension was almost completely ignored. The north/south dimension, which was quite ambitious in the framework document which John Major and I negotiated, was diluted down to very little in the final Good Friday agreement. “Power-sharing has worked only intermittently. We don’t, I think, in Northern Ireland have collective responsibility. We have individual ministers doing individual things. The Good Friday agreement needs to be refurbished to work as a practical operation rather than something symbolic. The UK has done very little as the sovereign power to make it work properly.” - Additional reporting PA