Many countries will find it hard to avoid a recession in the coming months as Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, lockdowns in China and ongoing supply-chain issues disrupt activity and trade and accommodative monetary policy is withdrawn, the World Bank has warned. Eoin Burke-Kennedy. La Francaise Real Estate Managers (REM) has secured its first healthcare asset in Ireland, paying €10.65 million for Ballintaggart House in the south Dublin suburb of Clonskeagh. The acquisition of the property, which is let in its entirety to Sims IVF until March 31st, 2033, will provide the French investor with a net initial yield of 4.77 per cent. Ronald Quinlan reports. The idea that technology can liberate us from the drudgery of work is a powerful one. It has also been a powerful disappointment, at least so far. Many bemoan the fact that John Maynard Keynes thought we could all be working a 15-hour week by now. Sarah O’Connor wonders why we are working so much harder. Just over 14 months after signing up as tenants for the second floor of Maple House in Stillorgan, the well-known personal financial adviser Paul Merriman and his company Pax Asset Management (trading as Ask Paul and Pax Financial) have acquired the building in its entirety for €5.2 million, writes Ronald Quinlan Regulators in Brussels have agreed a long-awaited deal that will force companies such as Apple to use a common charger for smartphones and laptop computers. The agreement on Tuesday follows more than a decade of discussions as regulators argued such a device was needed to counter electronic waste and curb the number of chargers consumers have to carry. Javier Espinoza reports. Developer TIO (Targeted Investment Opportunities) has secured a further two occupiers for its North Dock office scheme in Dublin’s north docklands. Interactive Brokers and HEAnet join existing tenants Gilead Sciences and Blueface, both of which have established their EMEA headquarter operations at the development, reports Ronald Quinlan Air travel’s recovery gained more altitude over the bank holiday weekend with flights nearing 90 per cent of pre-pandemic levels, official figures show, writes Barry O’Halloran. State airports expected almost 330,000 people over the June bank holiday weekend, which marks the start of air travel’s busiest months. Agent QRE Real Estate Advisers is seeking a combined guide price of €3.75 million for two retail warehouse assets in Co Kildare, writes Ronald Quinlan. Located in Clane and Newbridge, the investments have both been let recently on new long-term leases to well-known tenants, and as such, offer the prospective purchaser the benefit of immediate and secure rental income. Tourism and air travel have rebounded strongly in 2022 after two years of pandemic restrictions. But both are also facing major issues around pricing, staff and availability of product. In our latest episode of the Inside Business podcast, hotelier Lorraine Sweeney and Irish Times Business Affairs Correspondent Mark Paul outline some of the problems faced by the hospitality sector. Ciarán Hancock is also joined by aviation expert Joe Gill of Goodbody, to discuss how airlines across Europe are faring and whether the queuing at Dublin Airport will have a lasting impact on Ireland’s reputation as a tourism destination. Stay up to date with all our business news — sign up to our Business Today daily email news digest.