A mother of two who died when the car she was driving entered the River Lee in Cork last week has been remembered at her requiem Mass as a loving parent who radiated beauty and warmth, and touched the lives of all who knew her. Gillian Daly (44) of Douglas in Cork died after her car went in to the river at Kennedy Quay in the city at around 8.45pm last Friday. Her children Evan and Luke, who are aged ten and twelve, managed to escape from the car. At her funeral Mass in Millstreet, Co Cork today her brother Jason said that the respected and popular primary school teacher had a heart of gold. “You (Gillian) lived your life for your sons. Always caring and worrying about them. You dedicated yourself totally to them. Your gentle and warm nature lives on through them and will forever more. " Mr Daly also read out a few words on behalf of his brother in law, John O’Connell, who stated that he and his late wife had been inseparable through “thick and thin -- good times and bad.” “There isn’t enough time and there aren’t enough words to do justice to the lifetime of joy and happiness that you brought to the people around you and especially to me and our two beautiful children Evan and Luke. “You took to motherhood like a duck to water. There has never been two children as cherished and loved by a mum as our two handsome boys. You have raised two fine brave young boys. “The values you have instilled in them will make it a very easy job for me to finish your life’s work and raise them to the young men that any mum would be proud of.” The family of the late Gillian Daly thanked Cork Fire Brigade, HSE paramedics, the Coastguard 117 helicopter, the Naval service, Cork River Rescue, Mallow Search and Rescue and staff at CUH for all of their efforts last Friday night. Meanwhile, chief celebrant, Fr Jack Fitzgerald, told mourners that Gillian was an exceptionally loyal and true friend and would be forever remembered that way. Offertory gifts included pictures of her two sons, a travel guide, a poetry book, blusher to represent her love of socialising, and the artwork of children indicating her love for her students. Gillian is survived by her husband John, sons Evan and Luke, parents John Joe and Helen, brothers Jason and John, sister Caroline, parents in law Martin and Eileen, brothers in law, sisters in law, uncles, aunt, nephews, nieces, neighbours, relatives and her many friends including her life long friend, Nuala. Ms Daly was laid to rest at St Eltin’s cemetery in Kinsale following her requiem mass at St Patrick’s Church in her home town of Millstreet.