Longitude is back. For the first time since 2019, the festival will see Marlay Park packed with music fans for three days, from Friday, July 1st to Sunday, July 3rd. The event has been a staple of the Irish festival season for years and its return has been hotly anticipated. The line-up has changed drastically over the years, moving from rock, indie and alternative acts in its early incarnations, to become dominated by R&B and hip-hop in more recent times. This is your handy guide to everything you need to know about this year’s event. The festival takes place this weekend from Friday, July 1st, to Sunday, July 3rd, in Marlay Park, south Co Dublin. Gates open at 1.30pm each day. There is no camping on site. The expected finishing time each night is 11pm. This could be the tricky part. Dublin Bus and Go Ahead buses are not operating any additional services to or from the event. The number 16 Dublin Bus will get you close to the venue from the city centre. However, several private bus companies are running services that require pre-booking. Marathon Travel are running shuttles from Dublin city centre and Dundrum Luas stop. A full list of the private services operating from across the country can be found here. The Luas is also not operating any additional services. The closest stops are Dundrum and Balally on the green line, which are a 30-40 minute walk away from the Marlay Park entrance on Grange Road. A taxi rank will be in place at Supervalu near Ballinteer Avenue, but taxis have recently been difficult to secure in Dublin late at night. Car parking is extremely limited at Marlay Park and will open an hour before the time on your ticket each day. If you’re planning on driving, get there early and take junction 13 off the M50. Now for the fun part. This year’s line-up draws predominantly from hip-hop artists including headliners Dave (Friday, 9.45pm) Tyler, the Creator (Saturday, 9.30pm) and A$AP Rocky (Sunday 9.30pm). Megan Thee Stallion (Saturday, 8pm), The Kid Laroi, Polo G, Mabel and Aitch also feature. But it’s not just international stars on the bill. Home-grown talent will be on display from Denise Chaila (Saturday, 3pm), Kneecap (Sunday, 3.20pm, Heineken stage) and Kojaque (Sunday, 7.20pm, Heineken stage.) More stage times can be found on the Longitude app (Android and iOS) and a day by day breakdown is on the festival’s website. Yes. Three-day weekend tickets are still available for €249.50 including booking fees. Day tickets are still available too at €106.65 each, including booking fees. Met Éireann are forecasting a dry, bright Friday afternoon with temperatures of 16 or 17 degrees, with some rainfall expected before it gets dark. Saturday is expected to be mixed with sunny spells and scattered showers, with temperatures ranging from 15 to 17 degrees. Sunday is looking to be mainly dry but with a few showers later on and temperatures similar to Friday and Saturday. We’d recommend your usual bits such as house keys, an empty refillable water bottle for filling at water points inside, phone and wallet/purse and ID, along with a battery pack, good footwear, sun cream, rain jacket, sunglasses, a rain jacket or, if you can get one, a poncho in case the weather turns very Irish. Items not permitted at the festival include bags larger than an A4 page, alcohol brought in from off site, airhorns, megaphones, camping equipment, anything which could be reasonably considered for use as a weapon, laser pens, fireworks, flares, illegal substances and umbrellas. No food or unsealed bottles of water or soft drinks are allowed on site. Only sealed soft drinks/water bottles up to 500ml are allowed into the arena. (No glass or metal containers/bottles of any sort allowed.)