Sir, – David O’Sullivan inadvertently reveals the real problem with Irish defence and security policy (“We need a new way to talk about national security”, Opinion & Analysis, June 30th). He writes that Belgium developed its national security strategy with inputs from its foreign ministry and other relevant government departments. Unfortunately, in Ireland our Department of Foreign Affairs seems primarily interested in employing our Army as a tool for gaining influence in the increasingly irrelevant UN, our Department of Defence appears to regard the Defence Forces as an inconvenience, and our Department of Finance has historically regarded the Army, Naval Service and Air Corps as unaffordable baubles. As for the Irish public and the political class, their attitude is best summed up by the phrase: “It will be all right on the night”. – Yours, etc, KARL MARTIN, Bayside, Dublin 13. Sir, – We do need a new vocabulary about security, as David O’Sullivan envisages. The most effective term in relation to this is the concept of “human security” – what do we need to be secure in our lives? Mr O’Sullivan refers to many different factors but none, including the Russian invasion of Ukraine, necessitate a more militarist approach by Ireland; of course we should offer appropriate support to Ukraine but the idea that Russia is a military threat here is risible, and the contribution we can make to peace in Europe could best be done in non-violent ways. Runaway climate change is the greatest threat we face and after the effects of Covid-19 we cannot consider pandemics to be something to be ignored. Militarism contributes considerably to global warming and medical rather than military bodies are the most appropriate for dealing with pandemics. In relation to Nato and EU militarisation, why is geographical security only thought about in military terms? There are other ways to ensure security, and nonviolent civilian defence is one which is eminently suitable for Ireland but has not been explored at all. We should be looking to build structures for peace not military confrontation. – Yours, etc, ROB FAIRMICHAEL, Belfast.