The FAI has hired two of the three candidates in line for the director of football position. After a seven-month recruitment process, Marc Canham has been confirmed as Ruud Dokter’s successor, with a wider brief than the Dutchman, while the initial favourite for the role, John Morling, returns to the association next week as a “senior football consultant”. Canham arrives in August, after serving notice to the Premier League where he’s currently director of coaching, with Morling reporting directly to the 39-year-old Englishman to provide “support on young Irish player development”. Pat Fenlon, the Linfield general manager, is also believed to have sought the job. Canham previously worked with FAI chief executive Jonathan Hill at the FA and was “instrumental” in implementing the Premier League’s elite player performance strategy, which increased the number of home-grown talent playing in the English top flight. “It may not be that we need a specific Irish solution to what are Irish challenges,” said Hill last February. “Does that person need to be Irish? Not necessarily … We will find the best person but they have to understand the context of Irish football.” Canham, in contrast to Hill, immediately confirmed his family will move from England to Ireland to assuage some concerns around the role being filled by someone lacking historical knowledge of grassroots football on the island. “I am, along with my family, [are] thrilled to be moving to Ireland,” said Canham. “Having Irish grandparents, I have always followed the fortunes of the Republic of Ireland international teams. I hope we can work collectively to bring many more exciting memories for all and to use football to inspire the nation and connect communities.” Morling headed the Brighton and Hove Albion academy for nine years, a club that has proved fertile ground for Irish talent, before departing last February. Via an initial connection through Brian Kerr, Morling previously coached the Ireland under-15s, under-16 and under-17s men’s teams.