Technology company Expleo Ireland is to create 200 jobs in the next two years as part of a €10 million investment that will see its total team in Ireland grow to 1,000. The company said it would also establish a network of regional office hubs to attract workers, with the first hub already open in Mahon, Co Cork. Hubs are also planned for Galway and Limerick IT services provider and digital transformation specialist Expleo has been operating in Ireland for more than 20 years. Formerly known as SQS, it was acquired by Assystem Technologies in 2018 and subsequently rebranded. It works in areas including project management, business analysis, digital transformation, software quality assurance and development, including full stack and low-code services. Revenues have grown 25 per cent in the past two years as the Covid-19 pandemic drove widespread adoption of digital services. The new jobs will support this growth and will be highly skilled IT roles across areas such as software development, devops, software engineering and technical engineering, working in transformative technologies and projects such as hyper-automation, robotic process automation and agile transformation. Those employees who choose to work in the regional hubs around the country will be offered the same working arrangements as those in the Dublin and Belfast offices that allows then to split their working time between home and hub offices or client sites. The company will also implement regular collaboration days. Managing director of Expleo Ireland, Phil Codd, said the company was going from strength to strength. “Following extensive research of available resources and skills throughout the country, it was evident that regional hubs would provide Expleo with the additional talent and impetus we need to deliver on our ambitious growth plans. “Our new hires in Cork will have access to all the benefits our current employee base enjoys including competitive salaries, flexible working, world-class training programmes and a highly supportive working culture. We’re also looking forward to expanding our national footprint further with new hubs in Galway and Limerick also expected to open this year.” Headquartered in France, Expleo employs 15,000 people in 30 countries. In 2019, the company generated €1.1 billion in revenue, and is projected to have exceeded €1 billion in 2021.