Contentious plans for a seven-storey, 67-unit build-to-rent scheme for Collins Avenue East on Dublin’s north side has been given the green light by An Bord Pleanála. Developer Vervdev Ltd was granted permission despite a warning from Clontarf Golf Club that the scheme would be seriously injurious to the playability of the golf course, in particular the 12th and 13th holes. The golf club was one of five parties to lodge appeals to An Bord Pleanála against the grant of permission by Dublin City Council for the scheme 400m to the northwest of Killester village. The other appellants were Cllr Deirdre Heney (FF), Lesley Byrne and Derek Breen, Paul Daly and Lisa Lynn. Representing the golf club, chartered engineer Douglas Hyde told the appeals board that the 12th and 13th holes at the course “would be seriously adversely affected by the proposed development”. The golf club bounds the site to the south, and Mr Hyde stated that no specific measures are included in the proposal to ensure protection of the recreational amenities and playability of the golf course. He stated that no security netting or fencing was proposed by the developers. In her appeal Ms Heney contended that the proposal constitutes overdevelopment and would result in overlooking and loss of privacy. She said there was little evidence that the city council, in making its original decision, had given adequate consideration to the impacts on future residents of the development. The appeals board granted planning permission in line with the recommendation of its inspector Pauline Fitzpatrick. Ms Fitzpatrick stated that in terms of safety and issues arising from errant golf balls, both the golf club and the applicants had submitted reports addressing this matter in which there is no consensus. “Certainly the existing trees provide for a level of protection which would be removed should the trees be felled. Notwithstanding, I would subscribe to the view that it is the golf club’s responsibility to ensure the safety of adjoining lands.” As part of her 61-page report Ms Fitzpatrick stated that the scheme’s impacts must be balanced against the need to develop infill sites at higher and more sustainable densities in accordance with nationally-adopted strategies. She concluded the proposal would not have excessively overbearing impacts when viewed from the adjoining residential property to justify a refusal of permission.