There has been a “significant surge” in incidents at level crossings this year so far, Irish Rail has said, with the number being almost 75 per cent higher than during the same period in 2021. Irish Rail has partnered with the gardaí, the Road Safety Authority (RSA) and local authorities to host information days to inform and educate road users about the dangers of not acting safely at level crossings. There have been 54 incidents at level crossings across the network since the start of the year, up from 31 during the same period last year, representing an increase of 74 per cent. According to Irish Rail, some of these incidents have been “particularly worrying”. It shared footage of a cyclist getting caught in a barrier that was lowering, as well as a haulier driving through descending gates. The top 10 level crossings where incidents have taken place year to date are predominantly in Dublin, as well as one in Co Cork. They are: Lansdowne Road, Serpentine Avenue, Sandymount Avenue, Sutton, Bray, Merrion Gates, Baldoyle Road, Coolmine, Cosh (between Sutton and Howth), Sydney Parade and Banteer in Cork. There are 909 level crossings on the Iarnród Éireann (Irish Rail) network, a number which has reduced from over 2,000 since the turn of the century. These are a combination of automated CCTV crossings, manned crossing and unmanned user operated accommodation crossings, including on farmlands. The company is working to eliminate as many level crossings as practicable, with 69 level crossings having been closed between 2014 and 2022. Irish Rail has called on members of the public to use crossings responsibly, such as by never going through the crossings when barriers are about to lower or are lowering at automatic crossings. At user-operated crossings, the company advises the public to always stop before crossing to check the line and to always close the gate after use. Speaking on International Level Crossing Awareness Day, Sam Waide, chief executive of the RSA said: “There really is no room for complacency when it comes to level crossings, because if you take risks at level crossings you are gambling with your life and potentially others.” Jim Meade, chief executive of Iarnród Éireann, said the number of incidents at level crossings is “still too high”. “In recent months, we have had a number of very worrying collisions at level crossings and we would appeal to all road users to obey the rules of the roads at level crossings. They are for everyone’s safety,” he added.