Sir, – The focus of the opposition to the UK’s Northern Ireland Protocol Bill has naturally been on the failure of the UK government to honour an international agreement. However, perhaps the most egregious and undemocratic component of the Bill is that it removes the option for the Northern Ireland Assembly to vote in 2024 to retain the original protocol. So, even if it was possible for the EU and the UK to agree a compromise on implementation, something the UK continues to publicly aspire to, effectively the protocol is to be scrapped in direct response to the wishes of the DUP and the European Research Group, (ERG). A majority of MLAs in the Assembly have written to Boris Johnson in opposition to the Bill but they must now wonder what form of democracy now applies in Northern Ireland and how this Bill protects the Good Friday Agreement. – Yours, etc, MARTIN McDONALD, Terenure, Dublin 12. Sir, – Given the fact that the Northern Ireland protocol was established to preserve the Republic’s position within the European single market, while maintaining a porous border with Northern Ireland following Brexit, the attempts to remove the protocol by the unionists in the North and the British government, should be called out for what they are; namely an attack on Irish sovereignty. Considering our troubled history with the UK, and the fact that we are constantly reminded in recent decades of how much this has improved, this is sad and offensive to the vast majority of Irish people. – Yours, etc, CILLIAN Ó LONGAIGH, Rathborne Way, Dublin 15. Sir, – At a time when Boris Johnson seeks to distract from his own indeterminable woes in the wake of partygate and the confidence vote by seeking to undermine the Northern Ireland protocol, perhaps the best response of the EU and the State would be to take a time of reflection before any countermeasures. By taking the time to allow Johnson’s breaking of international law to be seen amongst the international community as the way his regime does business would act as a suitable time in the daylight to showcase how trustworthy his UK government is. After all any kneejerk reaction may distract from some of the other issues that the UK faces such as the zero per cent growth forecast and a soaring cost of living crisis. European Commission vice-president Maroš Šefcovic, produced a potential solution nine months ago; let Mr Johnson have at least this amount of time before we respond. We may even have someone else to respond to at that point. – Yours, etc, RORY J WHELAN, Drogheda, Co Meath.