Last year I was in Beaumont, recovering from an operation. I lay in bed with 30 staples along my spine. And I was so proud of them that I took a photograph with the aid of a mirror in the hospital bathroom. If the illness arose as a subject of conversation in the future, I would have an image with which to impress my listeners. The custom of brandishing scars at a dinner table was widespread in the Cavan of my childhood. I often saw men opening their shirts to display the white line of the knife along their ribcage after open-heart surgery, as if they were displaying All-Ireland medals. My little staples were not so dramatic. They looked more like a zip, or sleepers for a tiny train. But at least I had a few colourful details about the operation to spice up any narrative. For example, someone attached cod liver oil capsules to my spine with a strip of adhesive tape before the operation. They X-rayed me with the capsules in place so that the doctors would have a precise map of my spine to work with when they cut the flesh. When I emerged from hospital I wasn’t in a mood for visitors. I moped around the garden, lingered in the bedroom or lay on the sofa as a stream of Netflix movies assaulted my tranquillity. And when I tried to get up from the sofa, it was almost impossible. [ Michael Harding: It may surprise you that I took a passport to fly from Donegal to Dublin ] That’s when I remembered the walking stick. It was in my office for years. The shaft was made from blackthorn, and the handle was crafted from the jawbone of a goat. It was a gift, and I used it once in a theatre show, in which I played an old man recounting a tragic tale; the stick gave me a kind of authenticity on stage that the drama required. But I never used it in real life. It was a theatrical prop. And it ended up hanging on the wall just beside the bookcase, where I keep my religious icons. And sometimes it too acquired the air of a sacred object. Walking sticks demanded my attention as a child. My granny had one. And a blind man who lived next door to her on Bridge Street had another. He would sit in the sun with a handkerchief on his bald head and his knuckles wound around the top of his stick. In fact, I can’t remember any old people who didn’t have sticks in those days. It’s amazing how hip replacements can transform the world. As a child I was brought to Knock on several occasions, and sometimes to holy wells. Meandering through the crowds, I could not avoid the panoply of crude walking aids and crutches hanging from ledges or fastened to various walls — free-floating canes and crutches proclaiming that some miracle had happened there. Some wondrous cure had been obtained at the gable of that particular church or this particular well. I imagined the afflicted pilgrims being healed so dramatically that they just flung the crutches away from them. But I would have been terrified to touch a crutch or prosthetic limb. I had a vague notion that the disease of the pilgrim might remain in the crutch after the pilgrim had been cured. The stick or walking aid embodied pain, and if I dared to touch it some mysterious disease might flow down the shaft, into my body; such was my limited grasp of science. But that’s the way fear and awe operate. I had no language to contain the reality of suffering; so I could only construct meaning from symbols. Illness was about touch and sensation and objects that carried fearful magic; like the wands of wizards or the crooks of the white-haired bishop or the stick of the blind man who used it to beat out the time when he lilted a jig. [ Michael Harding: How a car crash in Mullingar helped reawaken my soul ] When I got through the operation people said I was lucky. But that’s not how I saw it. There was nothing lucky about the doctors and nurses in Beaumont; their healing power was transmitted to me through touch and sensation. And afterwards the walking stick became a symbol of that grace. I felt not lucky, but grateful. After a while I could rise from the sofa like a lark from it’s boggy nest, and the stick returned to the wall beside the bookcase of holy objects. Because it too was a symbol. A wand of invisible healing. An icon of the wound where the light came in.