Tributes have been paid to a mother who died after giving birth at her Co Limerick home. Home birth services in the region have been temporarily suspended following her death. The woman, named locally as Laura Liston (30s) from Dunnaman, Croom, Co Limerick, and Tubbercurry, Co Sligo, died after giving birth to her first child, a son named Shay, in Croom, on June 5th. A statement released Friday by the UL Hospitals Group, which did not identify Ms Liston, read: “We can confirm that we have temporarily suspended the home birth service in the midwest following a recent maternal death. The staff of UL Hospitals Group and of the home birth service would like to extend profound sympathies to the family involved on their devastating loss.” “We have commissioned an external review of the home birth service in the midwest. A group of external experts, including those with midwifery and obstetrics expertise, is being assembled to conduct the review; looking at patient safety, clinical governance and any other issues arising,” the statement said. A spokesman for the hospital group said it had “made contact with the small number of women in the region who were due to have home births in the coming months in relation to continuing their care”. The temporary suspension means that women registered to have had a home birth in the region will have to attend the University Maternity Hospital Limerick until further notice. It is understood Ms Liston developed life-threatening health complications after the home birth and was later taken by ambulance from the maternity hospital to University Hospital Limerick where she was pronounced dead. Ms Liston’s husband, Fergal Mannion, made an emotional tribute to his late wife at her funeral mass held in St Mary’s Church, Croom, on June 10th. Speaking on Friday Fr Richard Davern, who officiated the funeral mass, said: “It was the most tragic case I have ever witnessed in my ministry, or ever dealt with, and I just hope to God that the family will find strength.” “They have great hope with the little boy, indeed he has given them great hope and something to focus on at this awful time.” Croom parish priest Canon Willie Fitzmaurice said the community was deeply shocked and rallying around the heartbroken families. Fr Fitzmaurice said Ms Liston had helped many vulnerable people through her work: “She was a probation officer in the prison, she would have been well known and very popular with all the people she encountered in those areas of rehabilitation and so on.” Ms Liston, who was buried in Reilig Mhuire Cemetery, Croom, is survived by her husband Fergal, son Shay, parents Fiona and John, sisters Jenifer and Sarah, and brother John-Robert.