Andy Farrell has named five uncapped players included in Ireland’s 40-man squad for the forthcoming tour to New Zealand, namely Ciaran Frawley, Joe McCarthy, Jimmy O’Brien (all Leinster), Jeremy Loughman (Munster) and Cian Prendergast (Connacht). As expected, the squad closely resembles the 40 players ultimately chosen for the Six Nations, although Ronan Kelleher, Robert Baloucoune and Andrew Conway have joined a lengthening injury list which also includes Jack Carty and Dave Kilcoyne – all of whom were named in the Six Nations – as well as Chris Farrell and others. Loughman and O’Brien were both added to the Six Nations squad, while Prendergast was invited to train with the squad as a development player, and it comes as no surprise that the 20-year-old McCarthy and the skilful and highly versatile Frawley have been named. Carty’s wrist surgery also opens the door for Harry Byrne. The tours to Australia in 2020 and Fiji last year having been cancelled due to the pandemic, Johnny Sexton will captain the squad in what will be Ireland’s first tour since the 2018 series win over Australia. Ireland will play three Test matches against New Zealand in Auckland, Dunedin and Wellington as well as two fixtures against the Maori All Blacks in Hamilton ahead of the first Test and in Wellington following the second Test. Ireland have not toured New Zealand since 2012 and have never recorded an away victory over the All Blacks. Five players in the current squad were part of that tour a decade ago, when New Zealand’s 60-win completed a three-nil series whitewash, namely Cian Healy, Peter O’Mahony, Conor Murray, Sexton and Keith Earls while Tadhg Furlong, Iain Henderson, O’Mahony, Murray, Sexton and Robbie Henshaw were part of the British and Irish Lions squad who toured New Zealand in 2017. There are a further 12 players included who have won less than 10 caps for Ireland – Harry Byrne, Craig Casey, Gavin Coombes, Mack Hansen, James Hume, Michael Lowry, Ryan Baird, Dave Heffernan, Tom O’Toole, Dan Sheehan, Nick Timoney and Kieran Treadwell. [ Gerry Thornley: McCarthy and Frawley could be in line for All Blacks tour ] [ John O'Sullivan with details of Ireland's summer tour to New Zealand ] Andy Farrell commented: “This is the start of our Rugby World Cup campaign and it is going to be a fantastic challenge for our group facing five massive tests across the three weeks. “Due to Covid we haven’t had an opportunity to tour and touring plays a massive role in teams gelling together and building cohesion on and off the field. This group could also be the last to play a Test series in New Zealand which makes it even more special. “We will learn so much about the players and the group as a whole as we have to front up for five incredibly tough fixtures, far from the comforts of home and in grounds where the home support will greatly outnumber travelling Irish fans.” In an interesting development, Connacht’s senior coach Peter Wilkins – who devised most of the eye-catching launch plays which were a recurring feature of Connacht’s season – will join the national coaching group for the duration of the tour to assist in team preparation. In what will be a popular move, Mick Kearney has been reappointed as men’s national team manager following Gerard Carmody’s promotion to IRFU director of operations. Kearney previously held the position between 2012 and 2016 and will fulfil the role through to the end of the Rugby World Cup in France. Geraldine Armstrong will lead team operations for the tour to New Zealand while Carmody will continue to support team operations and planning for RWC23. The fixtures will be broadcast live on Sky Sports and on RTE Radio. Backs (18) Bundee Aki, Harry Byrne, Joey Carbery, Craig Casey, Keith Earls, Ciaran Frawley, Jamison Gibson Park, Mack Hansen, Robbie Henshaw, James Hume, Hugo Keenan, Jordan Larmour, James Lowe, Michael Lowry, Conor Murray, Jimmy O’Brien, Garry Ringrose, Johnny Sexton (capt) Forwards (22) Ryan Baird, Finlay Bealham, Tadhg Beirne, Jack Conan, Gavin Coombes, Caelan Doris, Tadhg Furlong, Cian Healy, Dave Heffernan, Iain Henderson, Rob Herring, Jeremy Loughman, Joe McCarthy, Peter O’Mahony, Tom O’Toole, Andrew Porter, Cian Prendergast, James Ryan, Dan Sheehan, Nick Timoney, Kieran Treadwell, Josh van der Flier