Minister for Social Protection Heather Humphreys has apologised to a Co Wexford woman after she received a letter seeking the repayment of €208 in disability allowance because it was claimed in the week her severely disabled teenage son died. Tracy McGinnis’ son Bjorn died on May 17th aged just 17 years. He was born with Congenital CMV, leaving him profoundly disabled. His illnesses included severe spastic quadriplegia, intractable epilepsy, scoliosis with a spinal fusion, osteoporosis and hip dysplasia. Ms McGinnis provided round-the-clock care for her son, who was also non-verbal and was fed using a tube. On Friday morning, less than a month after his death, she received a letter from the Disability Allowance Section, Department of Social and Family Affairs, which is based in Longford. It stated: “It has come to our attention that Mr McGinnis died on May 17th, payments continued to be collected at the post office up to and including May 18th. This has resulted in an overpayment of €208.” The letter continued. “This money now needs to be refunded to the department as you were the agent on Mr McGinnis’s claim I am writing to you for clarification in this matter.” Speaking on Newstalk radio’s Anton Savage show on Saturday morning, Minister Humphreys said the letter “shouldn’t have happened”. “How anybody thought it was appropriate to send a letter to a grieving mother is beyond me. I have spoken to my officials about it they are going to look at how they handle cases like this in the future,” she said. She described the letter as “tone deaf” and said “we have to do better… and ensure it doesn’t happen again”. “All I can do is apologise. We got it wrong here and we have to hold our hands up and accept that,” she said. Minister Humphreys extended her “deepest sympathies” to Ms McGinnis following the loss of her teenage son. Asked whether Ms McGinnis would have to repay the €208 disability payment, the Minister said: “As far as I’m concerned, this is about common sense and compassion, and no, she won’t have to repay the money.”