Sir, – In the aftermath of President Michael D Higgins’ comments on the housing situation, on Wednesday Fianna Fáil Senator Ned O’Sullivan, speaking in the Upper House, called for the setting up of a constitutional committee to clarify exactly the role of the president. Successive governments have studiously avoided tackling this issue. We had some incidents in the past and unless this is clarified, we will certainly have more of them in the future. Past convention is no longer enough to avoid future problems. – Yours, etc, TIM RYAN Dublin 4. Sir, – May I respectfully suggest to our President that a political career begun in 1973 to the present points more to his being part of the housing problem than its yet to be found solution. – Yours, etc, BRIAN FALTER, Ballyshannon, Co Donegal. A chara, – The idea that our President can delve in and out of politics as he pleases is akin to believing communism or fascism can be a little bit democratic. Populist headline grabbing is not an acceptable pursuit for the holder of our country’s highest office to engage in. This is not a grey area, it is constitutional law. The sight of the Opposition jumping on board is actually quite sickening; they are well aware of the separation of powers and the reasons for it. Every president has had to deal with crises, many of them far more extreme than the current housing shortage. The office of the president must be beyond reproach, becoming a little bit political is like becoming a little bit pregnant, you are or you are not. Our President needs to remember he is not. – Yours, etc, BOBBY O’NEILL PC Killeens, Wexford. Sir, – During the debates on the draft Constitution in 1937, Éamon de Valera explicitly said that the office of the president was designed to be an entirely non-political role, which would not involve itself in the controversies of the day, and avoid conflict with the government. If the president were to do so, he said, “you would immediately have two authorities, and you cannot have that”. President Michael D Higgins should heed the words of his predecessor. If he wants to continue to involve himself in controversial political debates then he should resign from his office and seek election to the Dáil or Seanad, or make his contributions as a private citizen. – Yours, etc, THOMAS RYAN, Harold’s Cross, Dublin 6W. Sir, – Given the (strangely anonymous) angry reactions in the press from Government Ministers over Mr Higgins’ remarks on the housing crisis, it appears the old adage rings true: the truth hurts. All the more so when you don’t care to hear it. – Yours, etc, AARON CASSIDY Chapelizod, Dublin 20.