Three Ireland is to create 175 jobs at its Limerick customer support centre over the next four years, bringing the total number employed there to 570. The new staff will support Three UK business customers, and will include full time and part time positions across a range of job titles and experience levels, ranging from customer care and team leaders to operations and management. “This expansion of operations in our award-winning Limerick customer experience centre demonstrates the strength of Three’s customer service in Ireland and we are very excited to build on the high standard of talent we have. As the largest mobile telecommunications provider in Ireland by market share, with the fastest overall network, our Customer Care was awarded Contact Centre of the year in 2021 and we’re extremely happy to bring this exceptional level of service to our Three UK Business customers as well,” said Robert Finnegan, chief executive of Three Ireland and Three UK. “This also underlines our commitment to Limerick as an employment hub into the long-term. Three Ireland has been investing and growing in Limerick for over 20 years, and today, we are reaffirming and increasing that commitment with the creation of these roles.” Established more the 20 years, the customer centre in Castletroy has expertise across a range of connectivity services including IoT, ICT products and cost management. The expansion was welcomed by Tánaiste Leo Varadkar. “These 175 new jobs for Castletroy are really welcome news from Three Ireland,” he said. “For over 20 years, Three Ireland has invested in Limerick and the Mid-West region, creating jobs and providing services. These new jobs further strengthen the company’s presence and commitment to Limerick and are a testament to the existing staff in Castletroy.” The expansion is being supported by IDA Ireland. “Three’s decision to expand the strategic operations at its Customer Experience Centre in Limerick is terrific news for the Mid-West Region and demonstrates Three’s confidence in its ability to service international clients from Limerick,” said chief executive Martin Shanahan.