Justin Lawless is chief executive of Intact Software, a business software provider founded back in 1992 with a single purpose — to create straightforward, easy to use accounting software. It has expanded considerably since in size and geographically. Financial security for my family is important to me, so yes, for peace of mind, I save money. The cushion of having funds set aside to cover life’s unexpected events is essential. It’s enough of an incentive to make saving a priority. However, I’m definitely guilty of the odd impulse purchase — I hold my hands up. I go deep: reviews, usage videos, unboxing, surveying of friends and seeking promo codes. For online purchases, I work out exchange rates if coming from outside Ireland, and I always try to figure out ways to ensure that I get free delivery, although I’ve been known to buy more than needed to actually get that free delivery. Guitars — no competition. It’s not about their cost, it’s about the joy me and my boys get from playing them. As much as I’d hope they’ll accrue in value, I know it’s unlikely with all the use they get. My marriage licence, bought at City Hall, New York, was $100, so I consider that to be the best value of all. I buy local when I have the choice, and especially from family-run businesses in Dundalk. Covid has really made me appreciate local, Irish small businesses even more. I love a good deal. As a systems person, I know that some business systems have inbuilt haggling mechanisms. Interestingly, most people don’t know about it. Have I said too much? The biggest reduction in spending has been travel. I haven’t travelled with my family since before Covid began, but I’m hoping to change that shortly. My annual subscriptions have increased for content that I really appreciate, like podcasts and audiobooks. I invest a small amount in shares and ETFs as part of a saving plan, but I’m not into timing the market. It’s more about time in the market, so I tend to take my time in making proactive adjustments. I’m hopeful that, over a period of 10-15 years, it will grow higher than inflation. Watch. A suit. Following Covid-19, I had to “suit up” for re-entry into the real world. While Zoom facilitated the fashion of T-shirts, face-to-face meetings with distributed teams, customers and partners needed something more appropriate. It’s probably too soon to tell if it was good value or not, as I like to get a few years out of a suit. Yes, I’ve saved up for a few of the key purchases in my life — car, holidays, engagement ring. No, and I don’t ever intend to. I lost a pair of sunglasses about four years ago on the Underground in London and I still haven’t got over it. I like to take care of things, and I have tracking tiles on all my valuables, including my wallet. I would rarely bet. My father was a bookie all his life and his favourite line was “the only person who makes money following a horse is the one following it with a shovel”. I have a real concern about what’s going on around gambling at the moment, with virtual numbers games and virtual racing, and I have no intention of starting. While money is not a central driver for me, it’s important for family security and allowing me the freedom to experience what life has to offer. Undoubtedly, money makes life easier, even more so in uncertain times, but I know that it is only a small part of the equation. I like the simple things in life — family time, a cold beer on a Saturday night and the good health to appreciate both. €5.15 and a sterling 20p coin. intactsoftware.com