The US will create a new permanent army headquarters in Poland and deploy additional land, air and sea forces across the length and breadth of Europe in response to threats from Russia, US president Joe Biden said on Wednesday. New US warships will go to Spain, fighter jet squadrons to Britain, ground troops to Romania, air defence units to Germany and Italy and a wide range of assets to the Baltics, Mr Biden announced at a Nato summit in Madrid. He also underscored the Atlantic alliance’s commitment to “defend every inch” of its territory. “We mean it when we say an attack against one is an attack against all,” he told reporters at the start of a meeting with Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg. Steps by formerly neutral states Finland and Sweden to enter the alliance would make Nato stronger and all its members more secure, he said. “We’re sending an unmistakable message ... that Nato is strong, united and the steps we’re taking during this summit are going to further augment our collective strength.” US officials declined to provide details on how many additional personnel would be sent to Europe as a result of the changes. The US military has already added some 20,000 extra personnel on the continent since Russia’s invasion, bringing the total to around 100,000. A permanent US army headquarters in Poland would be accompanied by a field support battalion — the first permanent US contingent on Nato’s eastern flank, officials said. The move would strengthen the ability of US and Nato forces to work together across the entire eastern flank, Mr Biden told reporters. “Something that seemed impossible to many is becoming a fact today,” Poland’s deputy foreign minister Marcin Przydacz wrote on Twitter. “We have a PERMANENT U.S. presence in Poland... It is also a clear signal to Moscow.” Mr Biden said Washington would work with Spain to raise the number of US destroyers based in Rota, Spain to six from four, increasing the ability of the US navy to respond to potential threats. Washington will also position a rotational Brigade Combat Team in Romania that will add “3,000 fighters and another 2,000 personnel,” Mr Biden said. In the Baltic states, the US military will enhance its rotational deployments — which include armoured, aviation, air defence, and special operations forces — to reinforce security and demonstrate the combat readiness of US forces, the White House said in a fact sheet on the changes. Two additional squadrons of advanced F-35 fighter jets will be sent to Britain. The Pentagon will also add 625 troops in Germany to oversee and carry out air defence artillery operations, combat sustainment support and engineering missions. That adds to a recent forces build-up announced in April 2021. A short-range air defence battery will be stationed in Italy, adding 65 personnel. Mr Stoltenberg told Mr Biden the increase demonstrated the US leader’s “decisive leadership”. “We’re going to make sure that Nato is ready to meet threats from all directions across every domain,” Mr Biden said. “...We’re proving that Nato is more needed now than it ever has been.” The US move comes as Sweden and Finland look set for fast-track membership of Nato after Turkey lifted a veto on them joining. After talks in Madrid, Turkish president Tayyip Edrogan on Tuesday agreed with his Finnish and Swedish counterparts a series of security measures to allow the two Nordic countries to progress in their bid to join Nato. “We will make a decision at the summit to invite Sweden and Finland to become members,” Mr Stoltenberg said of the two countries, who overturned decades of neutrality to apply to join the alliance in mid-May. While the agreement removed a major hurdle to the Nordic nations joining, their bid must now be approved by the member states’ parliaments, a process that could take some time. — Reuters