Israel has rejected a reported offer by Hamas to return an Israeli captive in Gaza in return for the release of sick Palestinian prisoners held in Israeli prisons. On Tuesday the Hamas military wing in Gaza released a video clip showing Hisham Al-Sayed, one of two Israeli civilians being held captive. Both are mentally-ill civilians and both crossed into Gaza, defying an Israeli ban on doing so. The video documented Mr Sayed lying in a bed with an oxygen mask on his face. Mr Sayed, a Bedouin citizen from southern Israel, crossed into the Gaza Strip of his volition seven years ago and has been held by Hamas ever since. He had twice previously crossed into Gaza but was returned safely to Israel. On Monday, Hamas officials said his health had deteriorated, without providing details. Israel reportedly wants any exchange deal to include both captives along with the return of the remains of two soldiers killed during the 2014 Gaza war, also held by Hamas. Hamas said that they were prepared to negotiate a “humanitarian” prisoner exchange deal for Sayed and media reports indicated that they were seeking the release of all sick Palestinian prisoners held by Israel. There are said to be dozens of such detainees held by Israel, including some convicted of killing Israeli civilians, whom Israel would be extremely reluctant to free as part of a deal. Relatives of Mr Sayed said they were encouraged after receiving a first sign of life from him after seven years of captivity. The family called on Hamas to release him immediately and unconditionally. Israeli leaders denied Hamas claims that Mr Sayed was a soldier and publicly condemned Hamas for its treatment of the Israelis it is holding captive. Foreign minister Yair Lapid, who is set to become interim prime minister this week, said Israel holds Hamas directly responsible for the health of the citizens it holds in violation of international law. He said holding two mentally ill people prisoner for years was “an inconceivably cruel act”. “Hamas is also holding the bodies of two Israeli soldiers, trampling every possible ethical boundary and international law,” he said. “Hamas’s actions are proof that they are a despicable terrorist organisation that holds the citizens of the Gaza Strip hostage.” The two sides have engaged in prisoner swaps in the past, most notably in 2011 when abducted Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit was released in exchange for more than 1,000 Palestinians held in Israeli jails. Some commentators speculated that the video’s release was an attempt by Hamas to pressure Israel into resuming prisoner swap negotiations and rid itself of responsibility for the prisoner’s deteriorating health. However, while there was broad public support in Israel for previous deals which involved the release of captured soldiers, there is little support for concessions to bring about the release of civilians who crossed into Gaza of their own accord, breaking the law, despite the fact that both men are mentally ill.