European Union leaders plan to grant Ukraine and Moldova candidate status when they meet in Brussels on Thursday, taking a step towards the enlargement of the 27-member bloc that challenges Russia’s ambitions for dominance in the region. The invasion of Ukraine has revived the idea of expanding the EU after years in which it had languished due to scepticism by western member states, as it highlighted the geopolitical importance of EU influence and allegiance in the region. Diplomats described the step of granting Ukraine candidate status as unthinkable just months ago. It comes only 11 weeks since European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen personally handed the questionnaire required for Ukraine to take the next step to Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy during a visit to Kyiv. He vowed to complete the typically years-long process in “one week”. Many years likely lie ahead before Ukraine could complete the lengthy process of alignment required to become an EU member, which is difficult in normal times never mind for a country at war. Nevertheless, granting candidate status is a step forward and a statement of commitment to an alternative future within the EU for Ukraine and its neighbour Moldova, which fears being the next target for Russian invasion. There was some frustration among other countries with long-held ambitions to join the EU that felt they were being overlooked as Ukraine was prioritised, with speculation that some western Balkan leaders could pull out of a meeting with EU counterparts scheduled for the morning of the summit. Georgia is expected to be denied candidate status, while there are intense negotiations to persuade Bulgaria to drop a veto and allow the progression of North Macedonia, which has changed its name in a bid to meet the demands set down for it to join. Taoiseach Micheál Martin said ahead of attending the summit that EU membership had “transformed Ireland” and that he would like to see the same opportunity extended to others. “I have argued strongly that Ukraine be granted candidate status at this week’s European Council. The people of Ukraine have chosen a future in the European Union and they and Moldova deserve our full support,” Mr Martin said. [ Ukraine war makes co-operation with Moscow ‘inconceivable’, German chancellor insists ] Leaders are also set to discuss soaring inflation and economic uncertainty, while calling for Russia to release 20 million tonnes of grain that is trapped in Odesa port, deepening fears of global food shortages. Tensions over sanctions flared ahead of the summit as Russia accused Lithuania of blockading its enclave Kaliningrad and threatened retaliation. Lithuania stridently denied the accusation. “Any talk of a blockade of Kaliningrad is a lie,” prime minister Ingrida Simonyte said in a statement. Vilnius had merely warned Russian companies that they would no longer be able to transport steel and iron products across Lithuania to Kaliningrad from this week because EU sanctions on the products agreed in March were coming into effect, according to diplomatic sources. They said no deliveries from Russia have yet been blocked. The European Commission said the supply of essential goods to Kaliningrad was “unhindered”, and that it would continue to work closely with Lithuania to provide guidance on how the jointly-agreed EU sanctions are implemented.