Berlin investigators say the man who crashed into a school group on Wednesday morning, killing a teacher and injuring 32, was “a wilful act by a suspected mentally ill man”. The driver of the car, a 29-year-old man German-Armenian resident of Berlin identified only as Gor H, received medical treatment and is now being questioned by police. Berlin’s governing mayor Franziska Giffey said on Thursday that he appeared to have acted alone — and deliberately. However, it was difficult to be sure, she said, because of “the confused statements he is making”. One eyewitness spoke of how the man “drove forward into the crowd, then shifted to reverse and drove back into them”. Another told Bild: “I saw how he drove over the teacher, reversed and rolled over her body once more. I cannot forget the images of the young people lying on the ground.” Police said the driver received German citizenship in 2015 and is known to them for various convictions for assault, defamation, theft and breach of the peace. Police said the man was brought to a holding cell on Wednesday at 10pm and that a transfer to a psychiatric facility was likely. The man’s sister told Bild that her brother suffers from “serious problems”. On Wednesday at 10.28am, at the wheel of her silver Renault Clio, the man drove into a crowd at an intersection of the Kurfürstendamm boulevard. He then drove a city block on the pavement, crashed the car into a perfume store front and fled into an adjacent sportswear shop. There he was detained by passersby until a nearby police officer intervened and made the arrest. Hours after the attack, special forces team raided his apartment near the crash scene, but found no explosives or other indications of a terrorist attack. Mayor Giffey said the attack had “ripped open wounds” left by the 2016 Christmas market attack, a short distance away from Wednesday’s crash site, which left 12 dead. Chancellor Olaf Scholz described the attack as a “cruel rampage” that had left him “deeply saddened”. Seven young people from a visiting school group are still being treated for serious injuries, some life-threatening, while seven other classmates have light injuries. In addition,17 other passersby in Berlin are being treated medically while, in total, 50 people are receiving psychological assistance.