Ireland is in the middle of another wave of Covid-19 driven by Omicron subvariants of the virus, according to the HSE’s chief clinical officer Dr Colm Henry. There were 776 people in hospital with the virus as of 8am on Wednesday, which represented an increase of 25 on the same time the day before. Of these, 31 people were in intensive care units, which was a daily increase of three. The HSE said the number of staff testing positive in acute hospital settings is rising. The figure was almost 600 in the last week, putting further pressure on hospital services. The BA4 and BA5 subvariants now account for 90 per cent of cases and the previous protection from reinfection is now gone, Dr Henry told RTÉ radio’s News at One. Previously, people who had contracted the virus had a natural immunity from reinfection, but the new subvariants do not offer that protection, he warned. The virus is no longer seasonal, but “a virus for all seasons”, he said. While vaccination offers long term protection against serious illness, hospitalisation, ICU and death, hospitals are already under “considerable pressure”, he added. Dr Henry said the HSE had an emergency response plan in place which included testing facilities and capacity in hospitals, intensive care units and in the community. If Ireland follows the same pattern as Portugal, which experienced a similar upsurge in cases, the wave will last for six weeks after which it would plateau, he said. Speaking earlier, Minister for Finance Paschal Donohoe urged people who have not yet received a second booster vaccine to do so. “The message I’d like to emphasis is all about boosters,” he said. “We’ve seen further changes in the disease that continue to make it highly infectious, and many that do get it get very sick, but we know that our booster campaign can work. “I think 46 per cent of our population have no received a second booster, but that means more than half that still have not. “In particular, for those who are in their late 60s, for those who are immuno-compromised our message is please avail of the booster campaign. “That is the greatest line of defence to the disease and getting very sick and impacting on your health and that of those who are near you. And that’s where we will focus. “Vaccines work, they can really play such a vital role in minimising the impact this disease can have on your health, and we would just encourage all who have not received our booth to campaign their booster vaccination yet to please do so.” Minister for Health Stephen Donnelly has asked the National Immunisation Advisory Committee to examine if a fourth vaccine should be administered to people aged under 65 years later this year. Meanwhile, a number of hospitals, including University Hospital Kerry and Beaumont Hospital have reintroduced visitor restrictions. The former said it was revising restrictions from Wednesday in response to “very high incidence” of the virus across the county. It said this has led to a “significantly increased number” of Covid-19 inpatients at the hospital along with a “high level” of emergency presentations. Tallaght University Hospital said its emergency department is “extremely busy” with high numbers of people attending. “Any patient who is in need of emergency hospital care will be seen and the hospital urged such patients not to delay and to seek care,” it said. “People who attend the emergency department with non-urgent conditions will be seen but they will have a lengthy wait and to avoid this we would encourage them to seek assistance elsewhere such as a GP or pharmacy.”