The 2022 European Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture Advisory Commission (EIFAAC) Symposium will be hosted by Inland Fisheries Ireland and the Department of Environment, Climate and Communications in the Dromhall Hotel, Killarney, Co Kerry, on June 20th and 21st. The mission of EIFAAC is to promote the long-term sustainable development of European inland fisheries and aquaculture. Four themes have been identified relating to inland fish stock assessment, developments in freshwater fish monitoring technologies, assessing the impacts of climate change on freshwater fish and their habitats, and the role of citizen science. The fifth theme will focus on the pros and cons of traditional versus recirculation aquaculture systems. The registration fee is €150 (students €80) and includes delegate pack, opening reception and lunch refreshments. Banquet dinner is optional at €80. Payment can be made at Sandra.Doyle@fisheriesireland.ie. Delegates are asked to make their own accommodation reservations. Randles Hotel Group in Killarney can be booked at +353 64 663 5333 or through susan@randleshotels.com with a conference room rate (including breakfast) of €150 for one night with a single room. A morning boat tour of Killarney Lakes and a visit to Dingle Aquarium (afternoon) will be held on Wednesday, June 22nd A project undertaken by Natural Resources Wales aims to track scores of salmon smolts as they migrate along the River Usk, has entered its second year as efforts continue to halt decline of the species by pinpointing challenges they face on their journey to sea. Supported by the Wye and Usk Foundation, the project involves catching up to 100 smolts each year and tagging them with acoustic transmitters, which emit regular high-frequency pings. Aquaculture officer Oliver Brown said: “Previously we didn’t know how many smolts were getting to sea, so this project gives us a good indication of survival rates, as well as helping [to] understand how perceived barriers may be affecting migration. For example, bridge footings or weirs.” Anglers and the wider community will be delighted to learn that the Lough Ree lifeboat station on the River Shannon is better equipped than ever before. After saving lives on the lake for 10 years from a temporary base, the lough now has a brand new, purpose-built station. The crew have the practical and comfortable facilities they need, including a specially designed training room. Perhaps the most important addition is the new boathouse slipway with direct access into the lake, which will enable a faster response to emergencies. Last Wednesday on Lough Currane in Waterville, Co Kerry, UK angler Marcel Gilliou caught four grilse on the fly. On the previous day, the same angler landed a fine 4lb sea trout, also on the fly. Two further salmon were also reported trolling, according to Vincent Appelby. If you have an angling story to share, please send to me at angling@irishtimes.com.