Major overseas investors have raised concerns with IDA Ireland over the closure of Platinum Services, the private terminal at Dublin Airport. The Platinum Service, which offers fast track access through the airport at prices starting from €295, was caught up in the controversy about queuing chaos at Dublin Airport after it emerged DAA chief executive Dalton Philips used the service on the eve of issues emerging. Two sources with knowledge of the situation said customers of the airport, including significant Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) companies who usually use the service, had contacted DAA and inward investment agency IDA Ireland over the closure of the service. [ Readers share their stories: ‘Dublin Airport - you had one job!’ ] In a statement, a spokesman for the IDA confirmed it “has had engagement from a small number of companies in relation to this issue and has engaged with the department as a result”. “IDA Ireland would like to see all services resume at Dublin Airport as soon as is practical.” It was reported this week that the service had been closed to new bookings. A spokesman said at the time that DAA had taken this action to “optimise resources across our airport operation”. “We apologise for any inconvenience this may cause and hope to resume normal services in the near future.” It was reported in the Irish Independent that the closure followed pressure from the Government. Mr Philips told an Oireachtas committee that he had used the Platinum Service when flying to Saudi Arabia on business the day before the scenes at Dublin Airport, which led to more than 1,400 people missing their flights at the end of May. The airport blamed overstretched security screening services which combined with rostering problems to cause the issue. Despite fears that queues would re-emerge over the June bank holiday weekend, operations have largely proceeded smoothly at the airport, despite high passenger numbers. DAA published a plan to deal with queues if they emerge again, including “triaging” passengers in an outside waiting area if they turn up too early for their flights. Covered areas have been set up in case this is required over the summer. The Department of Enterprise, Trade and Employment did not respond to a request for comment before publication.