With life in the western world returning to some sort of “normal”, and given other preoccupations such as the war in Ukraine, there is a danger that declining public awareness of the continued virulence, adaptability and lethality of the Covid virus may breed complacency. We are not out of the woods yet. Far from it. When Shanghai’s 26 million residents last week emerged from two months of lockdown, the Chinese leadership was quick to boast of a major blow against coronavirus. With new daily infections dropping to 15 from 20,000, there is cause to celebrate what they see as a vindication of the country’s “zero Covid” strategy. But the picture remains far from rosy - in the city tens of thousands remain in lockdown in response to localised outbreaks, while across China 133 million people in 16 cities, down from 345 million in 30 cities, must still put up with draconian curbs on freedom of movement. And there is a real fear is that the virus could again re-emerge, requiring, in the absence of an effective vaccination programme, further dramatic, damaging lockdowns. There is no question, the leadership maintains, of re-evaluating the “zero Covid” strategy despite the reality that China is on the edge of entering recession this quarter for just the second time in three decades. In neighbouring North Korea, largely unvaccinated and unprepared, and unwilling to take international assistance, the World Health Organisation warns the pandemic is worsening, potentially disastrously. The WHO says that in Africa as a whole, although Covid-19 deaths are likely to fall sharply this year against 2021, it is expecting more than 166 million new infections this year. Since the pandemic began it has reported 11.9 million confirmed infections and more than 253,000 deaths from the virus. But a WHO study has found that there were probably 70 times that many cases that were never confirmed by testing. A little more than half of Africa’s 1.1 billion population probably acquired some level of immunity by the start of 2022, though only about 18 per cent have yet been fully vaccinated. It will be crucial to vaccinate far more people who are 65 or older or who have medical conditions that make them especially vulnerable In South Africa part of the picture is revealed in a new study that has found alarming evidence that new and widespread strains of the virus, subvariants of Omicron, have the capacity to evolve and dodge immunity. Infections surged in recent months despite research suggesting that about 98 percent of the population had some antibodies from vaccination, previous infection, or both. Dr Richard Lessells, a South African infectious diseases specialist, is blunt: “The virus will continue to evolve so that it can continue to spread in the population. It doesn’t end. This virus is with us for the rest of time.”