Businessman Ray Coyle who founded Tayto Park in Co Meath was a man of humour, generosity and “mighty vision”, his funeral mass has heard. Mr Coyle was best known for building up the Largo Foods group, which included leading brands such as Tayto, King Crisps and Hunky Dorys. In 2010, he opened the Tayto Park theme park and zoo near Ashbourne, which offers rollercoasters and other rides – and has become one of the country’s leading visitor attractions. Addressing a capacity congregation in St Andrew’s Church, Curraha, Co Meath Fr Kevin Heery welcomed Mr Coyle to the church where he said the businessman had been confirmed 60 years ago, at the age of 10. Fr Heery was assisted by the Very Rev Paul Bogle dean of the Church of Ireland, based in Trim. A crowd of about 200 people listened to the service relayed on loudspeakers in the churchyard. Fr Heery said it had seemed Mr Coyle was an unstoppable force in business “if not in the community as well”. He said the rural community in Co Meath had been placed on the map thanks to a theme park named after “Ireland’s most nostalgic of foods”. “When you are thinking of what do I want to remind me of home, we have Taytos and that was Raymond’s mighty vision”, he added. Fr Heery said the local community was brought together in shock last week at the news that Mr Coyle, in his 70th year, had passed away. “That shock has left its share of sadness indeed over our whole community of Curraha, Screen and Ashbourne as that huge presence has been taken from us”, he said. “We thank God for the love that was poured into Raymond’s life, for that strong personality for those gifts and talents and vision, for that sense of humour that caught many an unsuspecting victim unaware.” Fr Heery said Mr Coyle operated “not so much for his personal gain, but as a way of improving the lives of all those around us”. There were many, he said, who benefited from his “generosity and providence” who were “thankful for that quality”. Principle mourners were Mr Coyle’s widow Rosamond, children Charles and Natalya, son-in-law Arthur, his brother John, sisters Jennifer and Charlotte and his nieces and nephews. Mr Coyle’s daughter Natalya read from the Book of Wisdom “the salt of the righteous are in the hands of God, no torment shall ever touch them”. Mr Coyle’s son Charles read from the second letter from St Paul to Timothy. The funeral concluded to the strains of the song “smooth operator” and as Fr Heery led the coffin from the church he sang the hymn “How Great Thou Art”. [ Tayto Park founder Ray Coyle dies, age 70 ]