Summer is definitely here when they reopen the outdoor pool for the season at Ballymaloe. Heated via a biomass boiler, you can frolic warmly without any eco qualms. Dive in with a midweek escape package, which gives you two nights B&B in a Heritage Room, one five-course dinner, and all the charms of this east Cork spot on tap — including garden tours, and even a trip to the wine cellar, should that tickle your fancy. €790 for two; ballymaloe.ie Golf is definitely to the fore at Faithlegg House, a short putter east from Ballymaloe. This Waterford spot is an ideal base for exploring the beautiful Copper Coast, and the gorgeous little village of Dunmore East. Or just stay put and swing your clubs, irons and what-have-yous, as the Paddy Merrigan-designed course comes right up to the front door of the luxurious Manor House. Back inside, Jenny Flynn cooks up wonders in the Roseville Rooms, with an emphasis on local, fresh and seasonal. The Wine & Dine Summer Break at Faithlegg offers dinner, bed and breakfast, plus a bottle of wine from €259 per room; faithlegg.com Good things are worth waiting for, and anticipation can really add to delight. Get your big holiday for next year lined up now with TD Active’s Explore India trip, offering 12 nights half board accommodation, guides and adventures taking you from Delhi to Jaipur, Fatehpur Sikri, and of course the Taj Mahal. Chose from departures on April 21st or September 15th, and take €75 off when you book with the code MORE75, before June 20th. Prices from €2,099 pps; tdactiveholidays.com With layers of history, warm weather and amazing scenery, Turkey is a hot spot in more ways than one. Head for Kusadasi with Sunway, and enjoy the sandy beaches, fishing port, boat trips and the Grand Bazaar for all your souvenir trinkets and baubles. It’s also a good base to explore more including the Temple of Artemis and the incredible ruined ancient city of Ephesus. Seven nights in the 4-star Tuntas Family Suites is from €419 pps, including flights; or upgrade to the 5-star Ramada, from €735; sunway.ie