Jim Crawford’s Republic of Ireland under-21s are a two-legged victory over Israel in September away from reaching the European Championships for the first time at this age grade. Israel outlasted Poland to finish second in Group B behind Germany, who needed two late goals to beat them in their home match before only winning 1-0 away. “Israel will be a tough opponent, there’s no mistaking that,” said Crawford after leading Ireland to second in Group F behind Italy. [ Lisa Fallon: Patience is the currency of Irish football ] “They finished above Poland and Hungary in their group, who are very good teams at this level, and they also lost narrowly to the group winners Germany in each of their games. They had five players called up to their senior team during this campaign which shows how well they have done. “The talk from other countries in Nyon before the draw was that Ireland were the preferable opponent to be drawn against — that in itself is motivation for us. We’re at home first and we want a big crowd there to support us because we can’t lose sight of the challenge Israel will pose and the crowd will play their part.” [ Ken Early: Sportswashing suggests guilt when it’s more likely the Saudis are not embarrassed at all ] Meanwhile, holders St Patrick’s Athletic open their FAI Cup campaign at home to Waterford but the ties of the first round have Dublin club Oliver Bond Celtic travelling north to play Derry City while Crumlin’s Bangor Celtic face Shamrock Rovers. There is a local derby to whet the appetite with Cobh Ramblers welcoming Cork City to St Colman’s Park before the August bank holiday weekend. The FAI also confirmed the women’s cup final will return to Tallaght on Sunday, November 6th, with the men’s decider at the Aviva stadium seven days later. Both kick-offs are 3pm. As part of the FAI’s “no referee, no game” campaign, all teams in the first round will provide the officials with a pre-match guard of honour. FAI Women’s Cup — first round draw Sligo Rovers v Douglas Hall Whitehall Rangers v Athlone Town Cork City v Bonagee United Bohemians v Galway FC Peamount United v Finglas United DLR Waves v Treaty United All ties to be played on the week ending July 10th FAI Men’s Cup — first round draw Cobh Ramblers v Cork City Treaty United v Usher Celtic Salthill Devon v Malahide United Sligo Rovers v Wexford Dundalk v Longford Town Lucan United v Killester Donnycarney Bonagee United v Pike Rovers Derry City v Oliver Bond Celtic UCD AFC V Cockhill Celtic Drogheda United v Athlone Town St. Patrick’s Athletic v Waterford Finn Harps v Bohemians Bray Wanderers v Shelbourne Bangor Celtic v Shamrock Rovers Bluebell United v Galway United Maynooth University Town v Villa FC All ties to be played on the week ending July 31st