SATURDAY All-Ireland SHC quarter-finals Galway v Cork, FBD Semple Stadium, 1.45 – Live RTÉ 2 Can Galway recover from the horror show of the Leinster final? There were so many dissonant features of the display but the comparative flatline form of the likes of Cathal Mannion, Tom Monaghan and Brian Concannon, as well as Conor Cooney’s yips on the frees, surely won’t be repeated. If they rediscover something of their better selves the Cork defence hasn’t been seriously tested in recent matches, although when it was in the opening minutes against Tipp, it didn’t look great. Galway are running into a Cork team that appears to have turned a corner and has established impressive momentum, finishing Munster strongly and navigating the Belfast trip without too much complication. The cockpit of this match has to be the Cork defence and how it manages an improved Galway display. Henry Shefflin’s attack undoubtedly has better in it than was visible in Croke Park – it’s likely the manager’s shocked contemplation on the sideline after the match related to the squandermania up front. Defence wasn’t bad though and Kilkenny threatened surprisingly little from play. The problem with Cork is that they have serious pace and players in form, especially Conor Lehane. Galway haven’t lost this championship fixture since 2008 but their form all year doesn’t suggest they’re going to maintain that run. Verdict: Cork Clare v Wexford, FBD Semple Stadium, 3.45 – Live RTÉ 2 Wexford are slightly like Cork in that they finished the provincial campaign well without reaching the final and so are well rested for this. Vibes from the Clare camp indicate that the walking wounded, Tony Kelly and Paul Flanagan, will start but that Shane Meehan, a lively bench option, may struggle to be fit. Wexford are nicely balanced. Their defence was heroic in Nowlan Park even if Kilkenny obliged them with two-dimensional attacks and they will be more variously tested in Thurles. Lee Chin is back in form and driving the team from the middle as well as dropping in on the square for menacing interludes. Rory O’Connor has form with Clare, even if more so in league matches, and needs careful attention, which will be a challenge, probably for Rory Hayes whose covering play has been impressive even though his men have been getting big scores. Overall Clare’s defence has been good and it will take big performances to unsettle it. Of course, any discussion about Clare comes back to the Tony Kelly question. Can he continue to deliver astonishing performances? If the injury that forced him off at the end of the Munster final recurs, it will raise the spectre of the 2020 quarter-final against Waterford when even he was inhibited by a pre-match knock. Clare have been playing at a very high tempo and twice survived 70 minutes against Limerick. Reproduce that form and the impact on Wexford will be too much. Verdict: Clare SUNDAY Tailteann Cup semi-finals Westmeath v Offaly, Croke Park, 4.0 – Live RTÉ 2 Now that the regionalising is finished, the semi-final ends up with a neighbouring rivalry. Offaly’s rough year with injuries continued with the loss of experienced defender Niall Darby to a cruciate in jury a few days ago. Under-20 alumnus Kieran Dolan steps in. Westmeath have a tendency to be hit and miss. A good attacking team in full flow, they have accurate scorers in John Heslin and Luke Loughlin. It can be argued they were quite challenged by both Laois and Carlow who are Division Four sides next year whereas Offaly have the highest league ranking of the teams remaining and are well suited by summer conditions in Croke Park. Verdict: Offaly Sligo v Cavan, Croke Park, 1.45 – Live RTÉ 2 Cavan were ante post favourites for the competition and haven’t done anything to cloud that impression. They bring a serious attacking potential in Patrick Lynch and Gearóid McKiernan as well as the prolific shooting of fly-goalkeeper Raymond Galligan. They have a high-quality list of beaten opponents and are expected to have too much for a Sligo team that has cut its teeth on London and Leitrim, both after extra time. The likely absence of Niall Murphy is a blow for the Connacht side. Their spirits are good but may come under pressure if they concede too much too early. Verdict: Cavan