Russia has told Ukrainian forces holed up in a chemical plant in the embattled eastern city of Severodonetsk to lay down their arms by early Wednesday. Ukraine says more than 500 civilians are trapped alongside soldiers inside Azot, a chemical factory where its forces have resisted weeks of Russian bombardment and assaults that have reduced much of Severodonetsk to ruins. Col Gen Mikhail Mizintsev, the officer who was in charge of the devastating siege of Mariupol, said fighters should “stop their senseless resistance and lay down arms” from 8am Moscow time (5am GMT). The Russian army has shifted the bulk of its military efforts to capturing Severodonetsk in its attempt to take full control of Luhansk and Donetsk, collectively known as Donbas. Serhiy Haidai, the governor of the Luhansk, told Ukrainian television on Tuesday that two more Russian battalion tactical groups had been moved into the area. The fight for Severodonetsk is turning into one of the war’s bloodiest battles and is seen as a potential turning point in Russia’s advances in Donbas. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said the outcome of the battle for the Donbas region will determine the course of the war, adding that Ukraine’s forces are suffering “painful losses” in Severodonetsk and Lysychansk. Mr Zelenskiy has repeated his call for the West to step up the provision of heavy weapons to Ukraine. Ukraine’s deputy defence minister, Hanna Malyar, said the country had received only 10 per cent of what it asked for and there was no path to victory without the aid: “No matter how hard Ukraine tries, no matter how professional our army is, without the help of Western partners we will not be able to win this war”. Mr Zelenskiy added that Ukraine does not have enough anti-missile systems to shoot down Russian projectiles targeting its cities. “Our country does not have enough of them . . . there can be no justification in delays in providing them”. Elsewhere, the Nato chief said further artillery support for Ukraine will be discussed by members on Wednesday. Secretary general Jens Stoltenberg told reporters at The Hague: “Ukraine should have more heavy weapons. And Nato allies and partners have provided heavy weapons for a long time, but they are also stepping up.” He added the matter will be addressed on Wednesday in Brussels at the Nato headquarters of the contact group for support to Ukraine, saying: “(Ukrainians) need to be prepped for the long haul, as there is no way to predict how and when this war will end.” Mr Stoltenberg said the military alliance must build out “even higher readiness” and strengthen its weapons capabilities along its eastern border, adding the alliance needed a “more robust and combat-ready forward presence and an even higher readiness and more pre-positioned equipment and supplies”. His comments come ahead of a summit in Madrid at the end of the month. Leaders of seven European Nato members pledged support for applications by Sweden and Finland to join the alliance. “My message on Swedish and Finnish membership is that I strongly welcome that. It’s an historic decision. It will strengthen them, it will strengthen us,” Mr Stoltenberg told reporters after a meeting at The Hague on Tuesday. US president Joe Biden said temporary silos will be built along the border with Ukraine, including in Poland, in a bid to help export more grain. Referring to the 20 million tons of grain locked in Ukraine, Mr Biden told a union convention in Philadelphia: “It can’t get out through the Black Sea because it’ll get blown out of the water . . . so we’re going to build silos, temporary silos, on the borders of Ukraine, including in Poland”. On Tuesday, Pope Francis said Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine was “perhaps somehow provoked” as he recalled a conversation in the run-up to the war in which he was warned that Nato was “barking at the gates of Russia”.