South Africa (108-2) (Lara Goodall 48 (32), Anneke Bosch 44no (37); Jane Maguire 1-6) beat Ireland (104 all out) (Shauna Kavanagh 33 (32), Gaby Lewis 29 (32); Temi Sukhukhune 3-20) by eight wickets. Same, but different. Lara Goodall once again led the way for South Africa, continuing her good form on tour with 48 off 32 deliveries to steer South Africa to a series-winning eight-wicket victory over Ireland at Sydney Parade – the second consecutive result by such a margin. Goodall’s innings came after South Africa had won the toss and elected to field, Ireland starting positively, especially in the third-wicket partnership of 54 between Shauna Kavanagh and Gaby Lewis, but ultimately limped to a below-par total of 104. Ireland’s first innings total was similar to their defeat on Monday, where they ended on 107 for seven, but the circumstances here were different – 104 all out is never going to be a winning score, but the bravery with the bat that head coach Ed Joyce has been asking for was certainly there. Leah Paul started off by walking down the pitch at Ayabonga Khaka, driving nicely down the ground for the game’s first boundary. She nicked a wide delivery to Sune Luus at slip a ball later, an example of the risk of being so positive, but it’s a dismissal the coaching staff can live with. Kavanagh then reverse swept Luus for a boundary as soon as she came into the attack before Lewis hit two boundaries in an over off Nadine de Klerk – one a dismissive pull in front of square. All of a sudden Ireland had 20 runs off a 12-ball span in overs seven and eight. At 55 for two, the risks stopped paying off. Lewis departed trying to hit Nonkululeko Mlaba against the spin, before Kavanagh was later run out – her 33 off 31 balls the highest score of the innings. To go from 55 for two with 12 overs left to 104 all out with nine balls remaining will disappoint Ireland, but some dismissals at least stemmed from positivity. Arlene Kelly drilled a ball in the slot straight back but not high enough to evade a stunning, leaping catch from Nadine de Klerk off her own bowling. Sarah Forbes, on debut, was caught trying to power Tumi Sekhukhune over mid-on, while Jane Maguire picked out midwicket looking to do something similar. For all the talk of intent, the results are not there yet for Ireland; Kavanagh was the only batter to score at a strike rate of over 100. The contrast in shot execution was stark when Goodall came out to bat for South Africa. After watching opening partner Tazmin Brits nick Maguire behind for just three, she was imperious in the powerplay, swatting spin over mid wicket and seam down the ground. Ireland certainly helped with their lengths, at times too short, others too full. At the end of the powerplay South Africa were 52 for one, the back of the chase well and truly broken largely by Goodall who was on 38 striking at 158 thanks to eight boundaries. Ireland were 35 for two at the same point in their innings. A stunning diving stop from skipper Lewis did allow for the run out of Goodall when on 48, two short of back-to-back half-centuries, before Anneke Bosch finished things off with a flurry of impressive boundaries down the ground. A final margin of 2-1 in the series in favour of South Africa then, but Ireland did notch one confidence-boosting win and they responded to the call for bravery from their coach. The 50-over series between these sides starting on Saturday will afford more chances for the execution to catch up with the intent.