Bodies feared to be those of the British journalist Dom Phillips and the Brazilian Indigenous expert Bruno Pereira have been found in the Amazon one week after the pair disappeared. The Brazilian ambassador to the UK broke the news to Phillips’s family in the UK during a phone call early on Monday. “He said he wanted us to know that … they had found two bodies,” said Paul Sherwood, Phillips’s brother-in-law. “He didn’t describe the location and just said it was in the rainforest and he said they were tied to a tree and they hadn’t been identified yet.” “He said that when it was light, or when it was possible they would do an identification,” Mr Sherwood added. The news comes after police confirmed that items belonging to both men had been found during a search of the Javari region where they disappeared while returning from a four-day reporting trip. The objects were discovered thanks to a small but determined Indigenous search team that has spent the past seven days on the frontline of the hunt for the two missing men who had both, in different ways, championed the Indigenous cause. A small group of Indigenous volunteers spotted a blue tarpaulin in a secluded flooded forest off the River Itaquaí on Saturday morning. A larger group of Indigenous volunteers — accompanied by members of Brazil’s military police force and a Guardian reporter who has been embedded with the Indigenous search teams — returned to the location at just after 4pm and found a series of items floating nearby in the area’s murky brown waters. On Sunday evening a federal police statement said the recovered items included a pair of trousers, a pair of boots and a healthcare card belonging to Pereira and a backpack filled with clothes and a pair of boots belonging to Phillips. Earlier, a backpack, laptop and other personal belongings of the men were discovered submerged in a river. The items were found on Sunday afternoon, and were carried by federal police officers by boat to Atalaia do Norte, the closest city to the search. In a statement on Sunday night, police said they had identified the items as the belongings of both missing men, including a health card and clothes of Bruno Pereira, the Brazilian Indigenous expert. The backpack, which was identified as belonging to the missing British man, was found tied to a tree that was half-submerged, a firefighter said to reporters in Atalaia do Norte. It is the end of the rainy season in the region and part of the forest is flooded. The development came a day after police reported finding traces of blood in the boat of a fisherman who is under arrest as the only suspect in the disappearance. Officers also found organic matter of apparent human origin in the river. The materials are being analysed. Search teams that found the laptop and other items on Sunday had concentrated their efforts around a spot in the Itaquai river where a tarp from the boat used by the missing men was found on Saturday by volunteers from the Matis Indigenous group. “We used a little canoe to go to the shallow water. Then we found a tarp, shorts and a spoon,” one of the volunteers, Binin Beshu Matis, said. Mr Pereira (41) and Mr Phillips (57) were last seen on June 5th near the entrance of the Javari Valley Indigenous Territory, which borders Peru and Colombia. They were returning alone by boat on the Itaquai to Atalaia do Norte but never arrived. That area has seen violent conflicts between fishermen, poachers and government agents. Violence has grown as drug trafficking gangs battle for control of waterways to ship cocaine, although the Itaquai is not a known drug trafficking route. Authorities have said a main line of the police investigation into the disappearance has pointed to an international network that pays poor fishermen to fish illegally in the Javari Valley reserve, which is Brazil’s second-largest Indigenous territory. One of the most valuable targets is the world’s largest freshwater fish with scales, the arapaima. It weighs up to 440 pounds and can reach 10 feet. The fish is sold in nearby cities, including Leticia, Colombia, Tabatinga, Brazil, and Iquitos, Peru. The only known suspect in the disappearances is fisherman Amarildo da Costa de Oliveira, also known as Pelado, who is under arrest. Indigenous people who were with Mr Pereira and Mr Phillips said he brandished a rifle at them the day before the pair disappeared. The suspect denies any wrongdoing and said military police tortured him to try to get a confession, his family said. Mr Pereira, who previously led the local bureau of the Brazilian government’s Indigenous agency, known as Funai, has taken part in several operations against illegal fishing. In such operations, as a rule the fishing gear is seized or destroyed, while the fishermen are fined and briefly detained. Only the Indigenous can legally fish in their territories. “The crime’s motive is some personal feud over fishing inspection,” the mayor of Atalaia do Norte, Denis Paiva, speculated to reporters without providing more details. AP had access to information police shared with Indigenous leadership. But while some police, the mayor and others in the region link the pair’s disappearances to the “fish mafia”, federal police have not ruled rule out other lines of investigation, such as narcotics trafficking. In 2019, Funai official Maxciel Pereira dos Santos was gunned down in Tabatinga in front of his wife and daughter-in-law. Three years later, the crime remains unsolved. His Funai colleagues said they believe the slaying was linked to his work against fishermen and poachers. — Guardian with additional reporting from AP More to follow