Rosslare Europort has announced the acquisition of an 18-acre site to the north of the existing ferry and freight hub, which it said will help to add capacity as the port expands. The Iarnród Éireann-operated port also said that Canadian automation company Brock Solutions has been awarded the contract to digitise the port’s systems. Once that project is complete, Rosslare will “become one of the smartest ports operating in Europe”, the hub said in a statement, speeding up freight and passenger check-in with new technology. Rosslare Europort is in the process of executing its 2020 to 2025 ‘master plan’, a €350 million redevelopment scheme to enhance its freight and passenger facilities, improve traffic flow around the port and establish a large offshore energy hub off the Wexford coast. The port said on Wednesday that the site, which was listed for sale with a guide price of €2.5 million, will have a direct connection to both the port and a new port access road being constructed by Transport Infrastructure Ireland and Wexford County Council. Alongside the master plan, the new site — adjacent to the new proposed freight entrance to the port — will “add significant capacity” to Rosslare Europort as it expands, the port said. Glenn Carr, general manager of Rosslare Europort said: “The acquisition of an additional 18 acres of prime land and the contract award for our Port Terminal Management system along with our master plan ensures the future growth potential of Rosslare Europort as a key national port for the country can be delivered. “These additional further significant investments clearly demonstrate our commitment and dedication to continuously investing in the future of the port and ensure the full potential of Rosslare Europort is delivered both for the Southeast region and the country as a whole.” Rosslare, which now operates more than 30 weekly sailings to continental Europe compared to just three or so in 2020, has seen freight volumes through the port increase significantly since Brexit. Direct activity between the port and the continent jumped by over 370 per cent last year while overall freight volumes increased by 50 per cent compared with 2020. “Over the last 18 months we have seen Rosslare Europort rise to be the number one port in Ireland for direct RORO [roll-on/roll-off] services to the Continent and I am delighted that today’s announcement further builds on this growth and supports our vision in creating one of Europe’s leading ports,” Mr Carr said.