Summer is the best season for foundation, I think. While gloomier winter light lends a bit more drama — not to mention structure — to the face, strong, warm-toned summer sunlight is essentially nature’s ring light. And sure, the sun also sustains life on earth and all that other handy stuff, but its aesthetic benefits for foundation are our focus for the duration of this column. With the right base on your skin, summer sunlight is intoxicatingly forgiving. It makes even tired skin look plump and, when your foundation has sufficient glow to it, lends an almost indecorous juiciness. This is nearly impossible to create during the winter, when the cold, blanched light pinches the face, summoning blue and grey tones forth from deep in your skin like the nuns ordering you back into the classroom after break time in clipped tones. To achieve this beautifully obscene summer skin you need two things in your foundation (apart from the requisite SPF and skincare to prepare your skin). These are a sheer formulation and light reflection. That plump, radiant skin look can never spring forth from a matte finish or very heavy application. Thankfully, there are plenty of delectable light to medium coverage options. Giorgio Armani Luminous Silk Foundation (€52 at Brown Thomas) offers both. If you won’t countenance a barely-there foundation, don’t assume that “sheer” means “no coverage”. Luminous Silk is a Kardashian favourite for a reason — you can build it to almost full coverage if you prefer. In summer though, you really don’t need to. Without some texture or freckles showing through, it won’t look like skin, so apply a sheer veil with fingers and go in with a trusty concealer where you need coverage. When I want something utterly reliable and easy, I never tire of Trinny London BFF Serum De-Stress Foundation (€47 at trinnylondon.com), which really comes into its own during the summer. It garners constant compliments and applies flawlessly with fingers. The coverage is excellent but still looks natural and wears well even in hot weather. For something really sheer, try Rimmel Kind & Free Moisturising Skin Tint (€13 at Boots). It gives a soft blurring effect and a little bit of coverage in 12 shades, and it won’t sit or misbehave on drier skin. While I don’t find the shade range vast enough to suit winter skin, it works nicely for summer as the finish is so forgiving. If barely there isn’t your thing during the summer and you’d like more coverage, Charlotte Tilbury Charlotte’s Beautiful Skin Foundation (€44 at charlottetilbury.com) is the one. Thirty shades and a richly luminous finish with staying power make this an ideal option for summer. You can wear it all year round — it certainly has enough coverage for winter too — but it really sings in summer light. Again, while you can use a brush or sponge, you can also bash this on with clean fingers and have a flawless, glowing base within moments. Shiseido Urban Environment Oil-Free Sun Care Emulsion SPF30 (€40 at Arnotts and pharmacies nationwide).