Sir, – Mark Tottenham (Letters, June 14th) is correct to criticise the Orange Order as being anti-Catholic and exclusionary of other Non-Reformed Christian denominations. He contrasts this with the teachings of Jesus and Christianity in general, which he describes as promoting “acceptance, not exclusion”. Conversely, Catechism 846 still includes the Roman Catholic teaching, “Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus” (outside the Church there is no salvation). Jesus himself was also explicitly exclusionary in relation to the religion he founded. He sent out the 12 with the instructions, “Do not go among the Gentiles or enter any town of the Samaritans” (Matthew 10:5). The message of Mr Tottenham’s letter is that one Christian sect in Ulster has departed from otherwise inclusive and accepting Christian teachings. Non-Christians have often had a quite different experience of Christianity, including this week when it was reported that the bishops lobbied the Irish Government in favour of excluding non-Catholics from the State-funded schools that they manage. In fact, history shows us that exclusionary teachings have been commonplace among Christians, including Jesus himself. – Yours, etc, JOHN HAMILL, Castleblayney, Co Monaghan. Sir, – Where does The Irish Times find these Orangemen and their personal reflections I ask myself? (“I’m an Orangeman, and I found the Michaela McAreavey song disgusting and unforgivable”, Weekend Review, June 11th). This is an affront to all nationalists who have had the lived experience of existing beside these horrible bigots. Banging their drums with their sectarian songs making sure we knew our place. They march our streets to show their inherited “superiority”, laughing in their stupid regalia. Archaic nonsense. The annual festival of hate. This man offers his personal reflections. These are mine. – Yours, etc, MARGARET WILSON, Tyrone. Sir, – We are about to commence another season of marching in Northern Ireland and there will be lots of Orangewashing as the Loyal Orders portray themselves once again as purveyors of harmless folk pageants. Richard Mulligan in last Saturday’s Weekend Review described the Orange Order as “predominately” Protestant. Surely he meant 100 per cent? The constitutions of these orders quite explicitly exclude members of “non-reformed faiths” from membership. They are within their rights to exclude whomever they choose. But they are in receipt of generous public funding which if they were a golf club which excluded women, would be quite correctly denied. – Yours, etc, RORY E MACFLYNN, Blackrock, Co Dublin.