Tributes have been paid to Tyrone hurler Damian Casey who died on Friday in a swimming accident in Spain. Tyrone GAA announced the death in a statement on their website. The organisation said it was “totally shaken” by the death of the 29-year-old whom it described as having been a “supreme hurler just now at the peak of his powers”. “Heartbreak and grief can come in many forms but are especially cruel when brought about by the sudden death of someone young, talented, outgoing and in the prime of life. " Tyrone county board chair Michael Kerr described the news as being “beyond belief”. “Someone who brought honour, delight and simple, straightforward gladness to our whole county, and far beyond, is gone and it’s so hard to take in. There are very difficult days ahead for [his parents] Seán, Susan, [siblings] Louise and Catherine, for Damian’s wider family circle and many friends and associates, for his team-mates and for the Gaels of Dungannon and Tyrone.” Mr Kerr added that Casey was a special gift to Tyrone and to hurling. “We were the richer for his presence and are the poorer for his passing. Our deepest sympathy goes to them [his family], and our focus must now be on providing the support and comfort that will be so badly needed.” The Gaelic Players’ Association said that players across Ireland are devastated for the family and friends of Damian Casey and for all his team-mates. “Damian stood out as a person and leader. On the pitch he was a magician of rare skill. He was one of us. He was among the best of us. RIP Damian.” Dungannon Gaelic Forum said that a “sombre cloud” was hanging over their community following the tragic death of Casey. “Damian was a truly gifted athlete and an inspirational young man who had the world at his feet. An Gaelfhoram Dùn Geanainn would like to offer their heartfelt sympathies to the entire hurling community, especially everyone at Eoghan Ruadh Hurling Club and Tyrone GAA. “We offer our sincere sympathies to Damian’s friends, team-mates and family.” Casey died just weeks after starring in Tyrone’s Nicky Rackard Cup hurling title success, scoring a sensational 0-14 in that All-Ireland final triumph. The Dungannon man made his intercountry debut 10 years ago and was considered by many to be the best hurler to ever emerge from the county. A two-time GAA/GPA Champion 15 award winner, Casey also represented Ireland in a number of shinty internationals against Scotland. He started and scored in every one of Tyrone’s fixtures since he made his intercounty debut in 2012, amassing an overall tally of 39 goals and 908 points.