The Social Democrats have called for an immediate emergency budget to deal with increases in the cost of living, insisting that “people can’t wait until October” for further measures to assist them with rising costs. The party’s co-leaders Róisín Shortall and Catherine Murphy made the call at the party’s conference in Dublin this afternoon. “People are struggling to put food on the table,” Ms Murphy said, while Ms Shortall said Government finances were benefiting from rising prices through VAT and other taxes. “People are in dire straits now,” she said, “and the Government needs to act to help those who are most hard hit by the rising cost of living.” Ms Shortall said that the energy companies should be hit with a windfall tax to finance the additional supports that the Social Democrats were calling for. Ms Shortall said that the party was calling for refundable tax credits, so that “everyone earning under €50,000 would get a payment of €300 through the tax system”. She said there should be an “emergency €100 million fund” to supplement the current community welfare fund, which helps families and individuals in need on a discretionary basis. And Ms Shortall also called for an immediate €10 per week increase for all social welfare payments. “The Government must act urgently,” she said, “because too many people are in dire circumstances.” Ms Murphy added that all special welfare payments and emergency supports needed to be “targeted”. She said for many people experiencing difficulties dealing with cost of living increases, there was a “sense of panic” that costs were going to increase further beyond what they could bare. About 200 delegates attended the morning sessions of the conference, which is taking place in the Gresham Hotel on O’Connell St. Delegates heard fierce criticism of the Government from the party’s six TDs on the range of fronts, including housing, education, the pace of reform in the health service and climate action. Dublin Central TD Gary Gannon said there was an “ideological indifference to people experiencing hardship” in the Coalition. “It’s like we live in a society that is going to have some degree of inequality but that’s okay as long as it doesn’t affect Fianna Fáil and Fine Gael voters,” he told delegates, to applause. Later, in the televised leaders’ speeches to the party conference both women criticised the Government for failures in housing, healthcare, support for people with disabilities and climate action. Ms Murphy said that housing was “supposedly the biggest priority for government. It’s also its biggest failure.” She said that in previous decades, “single-income families with one worker on an average wage could aspire to lead a decent life. “They may not have been rich – but many owned their own home; they could educate their children; and they had secure jobs. “Today, single people are forced to continue to live at home; house share or rent tiny apartments at exorbitant costs until they are in their 30s, 40s and even older. “Older people worry about where they’ll live when they retire – and how they’ll pay for it. “Even couples, on what were once considered decent wages, are locked out of home ownership.” She went to ask: “What kind of society are we building – when affordability is now defined by the government as being €450,000 in Dublin and €400,000 in Cork and Galway? “Do they know a mortgage at those amounts requires incomes of at least €114,000? “What planet are they on?” Ms Shortall criticised the Government for the slow pace of reform and the delayed introduction of the Sláintecare plan for a single-tier public health service. “Why is there such resistance to reform? Who stands to benefit? Because, it’s not the Irish people,” she said. “The full implementation of Sláintecare in the term of the next Government will be a red line for our participation in that Government,” Ms Shortall said.