Taoiseach Micheál Martin said the October budget will make a substantial difference to those experiencing cost-of-living hardship but all but ruled out further measures over the summer. Speaking in the wake of several street protests over price rises, he said the cost of living was not something that could be chased from month to month. A sustainable approach was needed rather than introducing ad hoc measures that could change from month to month, he said. In an interview on Newstalk, Mr Martin said the summer economic statement would be the key next milestone in relation to the budget and the cost of living issue. “The summer economic statement will lay out what is available in terms of funds and so on and resources to help alleviate pressures on people and the objective and the aim is to do that comprehensively in the budget itself because we can’t chase it month to month. “However, anything we do in the budget around cost of living — quite a significant amount of it will have immediate application. We are going to work on that somewhat similar to last year. I don’t see things taking effect as the summer economic statement is being announced.” “That [immediate measures] is not planned for now,” the Taoiseach said. [ Cost of living protests take place in Dublin and other cities ] “Obviously Government will meet on this. There will be a meeting this week in terms of the three party leaders and the Ministers for Finance and Public Expenditure to discuss the summer economic statement . . . because that is very important in terms of the overall amount of money that will be available to us.” Mr Martin said he was very aware of the uncertainty surrounding energy supplies. “We are very conscious that we are dealing with a very uncertain situation. If you look even at the energy situation it is very very bad for people out there because of the war in Ukraine and all that is happening around that. “If you look again this week Russia is now reducing its gas supplies via the Nord Stream to the West. That could create even further problems as we head in to the winter,” Mr Martin said. “I am very conscious that the winter could be very challenging from an energy perspective and a cost of living perspective. So we need to work really on the evidenced based approach of the ESRI report that was published this week and look at targeted and in some instances temporary measures that will get us through this crisis for people. He also referred to “measures that would dovetail with more sustainable long-term policies we are doing anyway in terms of public transport fares being reduced and so on”. He said that he was conscious of the “acute pressures” facing the public. “We do get that. We know it will be a cost-of-living budget. But I think we have to do it in a way that is sustainable. . . if we start just doing packages one month and the next month the pressure will continue and continue. It is far better that we do more sustained comprehensive measures that will be sustainable over the winter period and take people through the winter period,” the Taoiseach said. Mr Martin said the Government was doing everything in its power to help the public through this challenging period. “We have already announced two and half billion euro over the last eight months if you take the budget in to account plus the measures. It is a substantial amount to endeavour to alleviate pressures on the public.” “You could do something very short term, but we have to in terms of the summer economic statement know what we are going to spend on childcare. What are going to spend on housing? You need to know the expenditure profile. That is all part of cost of living.” “People in genuine hardship and genuine need can [go to the social welfare office to seek assistance]. They can seek support. That is an avenue that is open to people,” Mr Martin said.