The Māori All Blacks head coach Clayton McMillan has named 11 new caps in a squad to take on Ireland in two matches during the five-game tour to New Zealand. One of the most prominent of those potential debutants is 78-times capped All Blacks scrumhalf TJ Perenara who joins Brad Weber and Tyrel Lomax as the main talking points in a squad dominated by players from North Island Super Rugby franchises. Perenara was surprisingly omitted from Ian Foster’s All Blacks squad for the upcoming three Test series against Ireland. The Māori All Blacks contains just six players from the 28-man squad that play for either the Crusaders or Highlanders. McMillan, who will be assisted by Roger Randle and Chris Gibbes, has selected a squad largely made up of Chiefs and Hurricanes players; 17 in total from the two franchises. McMillan said: “We are lucky to have three experienced All Blacks in the squad in TJ Perenara (Ngāti Rangitihi), Brad Weber (Ngāti Porou) and Tyrel Lomax (Muaupoko/Ngāi Tūhoe). I’m looking forward to the passion and knowledge they will bring.” The last time the Māori All Blacks faced Ireland was at the Rotorua International Stadium in 2010 with the hosts prevailing 31-28 thanks to a late penalty. There is only one survivor in the current Ireland squad from that match, captain Johnny Sexton. The Leinster outhalf kicked seven penalties and a conversion in a 23-point personal haul with centre Paddy Wallace scoring Ireland’s only try. The Irish scrum coach John Fogarty started as hooker in that match. A couple of the Māori All Blacks went on to play for Leinster, prop Clint Newland and secondrow Hayden Triggs. McMillan anticipates a similarly tough challenge in the two-match series, taking place in Hamilton on June 29th and Wellington on July 12th. “We are expecting a fierce challenge from Ireland, to be playing a tier one nation at home in Aotearoa has been long awaited. “These two fixtures against Ireland will allow players to showcase what they have and put their best foot forward on an international stage. The presence of two former Māori All Blacks in the Ireland side, Jamison Gibson-Park (Ngāti Porou/Ngāi Tai) and James Lowe (Ngāpuhi/Ngāi Te Rangi) adds to the special nature of this match.” Since 2000, the Māori All Blacks have played 10 fixtures against tier one rugby nations, winning seven of those and losing only to Australia (2001, 2002) and England (2003). Meanwhile, former Kilkenny College and Lansdowne prop Martin Mulhall has signed a professional contract with Pat Lam’s Bristol Bears for next season. While playing for Swansea University last season he caught the eye of Saracens, who played him in a Premiership Cup match against Wasps and from there he has managed to secure a contract with Bristol. There was also good news for 24-year-old Wexford born scrumhalf Jack Stafford, who has been upgraded from an academy to a senior contract at Harlequins. Stafford, who attended Glenstal Abbey, played age-grade rugby for Munster while part of the province’s academy (2017-2020). He made three appearances for the senior team before joining Harlequins following a two-week trial in the summer of 2020. He initially signed a short-term contract until October but impressed sufficiently to be offered a place in the academy. He made his debut against Ulster in a European Challenge Cup match in 2021 and since then has made six senior appearances. Stafford represented an Ireland under-20 team that included future senior internationals Rónan Kelleher, Fineen Wycherley, Caelan Doris and Gavin Coombes. Stafford said of his new contract: “I’m thrilled to sign a new deal with Harlequins. I chose a great time to join Quins two years ago as the team transitioned into a side that plays a style of rugby so well-connected to its roots and which is so enjoyable to play. “This is a place that plays the type of rugby every player wants to be involved in and my time in the jersey so far has been great. I’m looking forward to continuing to compete for game time in a competitive squad, playing some of the best rugby around.” Harlequins head coach Tabai Matson said: “Jack has been a fantastic competitor ever since he made the move over the Irish Sea. He initially came to us on a two-week trial period and displayed the type of work rate, drive and personality that suited this squad.” The reduction in squad size among English Premiership clubs has had a knock-on effect for several Irish players who for a variety of reasons have left their current employers. Niyi Adeolokun has been released by Bristol Bears, Conor Carey by Northampton Saints, Caleb Montgomery by Worcester Warriors, while Noel Reid, Jamie Dever and Cillian Redmond won’t be at London Irish next season. Māori All Blacks squad for Ireland series (*denotes debut) Tamaiti Williams, Ollie Norris, Marcel Renata, Jermaine Ainsley*, Tyrel Lomax, Leni Apisai, Kurt Eklund, Tyrone Thompson*, Isaia Walker-Leawere, Manaaki Selby-Rickit, Josh Dickson, Reed Prinsep, Caleb Delany*, Billy Harmon, Te Kamaka (TK) Howden*, Cameron Suafoa*, TJ Perenara*, Brad Weber, Josh Ioane, Ruben Love*, Alex Nankivell, Rameka Poihipi, Billy Proctor, Bailyn Sullivan*, Connor Garden-Bachop*, Josh Moorby*, Zarn Sullivan*, Shaun Stevenson.