RTÉ bosses will not appear before an Oireachtas committee following a number of formal complaints about a Liveline programme which discussed transgender issues. The Joint Committee on Tourism Arts and Media said on Monday that it was advised by RTÉ “that a number of formal complaints regarding the Liveline programmes of the 9th, 10th and 13th June are now being dealt with under the relevant statutory and regulatory provisions underpinning broadcasting standards in the State.” “The Committee recognises the right of complainants to be afforded due process in such proceedings and do not propose to consider this matter further at this time.” The chair of the committee, Fianna Fáil TD Niamh Smyth, said that the committee is “engaging with RTÉ regarding its diversity and inclusion policies and further engagement on such policies may be considered at future hearings.” [ Una Mullally: We need to see the manufactured debate on trans rights for what it is - nonsense ] Last week RTÉ indicated it would tell politicians that it planned to engage with Dublin Pride directly. RTÉ defended its Liveline radio programme after Dublin Pride ended its media partnership with the broadcaster over what it claimed was “unacceptable and extremely harmful” anti-transgender content on the programme. Dublin Pride said in a statement that as an official media partner of Dublin Pride but “more importantly as Ireland’s national broadcaster, we expect better than for RTÉ to stoke the flames of anti-trans rhetoric.” In a statement, RTÉ said it was “disappointed” with Dublin Pride’s decision. “Public discussion — sometimes uncomfortable, difficult and contentious — is central to RTÉ's prescribed purpose. RTÉ is acutely aware that discussions on issues such as gender and identity are deeply personal to many,” said the broadcaster. In an interview on RTÉ's Drivetime radio programme, Peter Woods, head of RTÉ Radio 1, defended the Liveline team. “I am sorry that people were hurt in this case but it is the nature of what we do that people are going to get hurt on one side of a discussion or on another side of the discussion. Not everybody agrees all the time,” he said. Mr Woods said that it was “always worth having the discussion” and “always worth people airing their opinions” even if it caused hurt to people. “Every day, in all programmes, there is potential for hurt,” he said. Taoiseach Micheál Martin then called for sensitive and tolerant discussion about transgender issues. “Acceptance is the most important issue for a trans person, and (we must ensure) that the discussion is a sensitive and tolerant one that understands the need to broaden the community acceptance of this,” said Mr Martin. “It’s a very challenging journey for a person, and everyone must recognise that. We must work collectively to make the debate, just like we did prior to marriage equality, a societal wide debate that unites people as opposed to dividing people, that should be our agenda.”