Hundreds of people took to the streets of several Irish cities on Saturday afternoon protesting over the State’s cost of living crisis and calling for more supports in the face of soaring inflation. Demonstrations were organised by the Cost of Living Coalition in Dublin, Cork, Galway, Limerick and Sligo. A similar protest was also held in Belfast on Saturday calling for supports to help people struggling to meet household costs and also for the Northern Ireland Assembly and Executive to be restored without delay. Several hundred people gathered by the Garden of Remembrance for the Dublin march before making their way down O’Connell Street chanting “prices are rising, so are we”. Hundreds more gathered in Cork and made their way through the city centre calling for change and support. The coalition behind the marches is made up of trade unionists, student and pensioner organisations and opposition political parties. Speakers at the Dublin protest included Fr Peter McVerry, Sinn Féin leader Mary Lou McDonald, chief executive of the Senior Citizens Parliament Sue Shaw, Independents 4 Change TD Joan Collins, Beth O’Reilly from the Union of Students in Ireland, and People Before Profit TD Richard Boyd Barrett. The Government has so far resisted calls for a so-called “mini budget” in advance of the autumn to roll out further measures. However, it has rejected claims that it has been slow to act on the issue, pointing out that the steps it has taken to tackle cost-of-living pressures since last October add up to €2.5 billion. Ms McDonald said: “It’s clear that we have a government that is absolutely out of touch, that has no real appreciation, no real understanding of this cost of living crisis... “People are suffering now, we need a response from government now, we need an emergency budget now.” Mr Boyd Barrett called for an increase in people’s wages and pensions to meet the “spiralling cost of living”. Fr Peter McVerry told the crowd that young people do not want to stay in Ireland because of the excessive cost of living and rent. “I am in despair. We have had a housing crisis for several decades and it’s simply getting worse,” he said. “What disturbs me is the lack of any urgency, the lack of any sense of crisis in addressing this problem. We have empty buildings all over this country, lying empty for many years. I see no urgency in bringing them back into use.” Minister for Housing Darragh O’Brien on Friday defending the Government’s record on housing after President Michael D Higgins described the situation as a “great, great failure”. Mr O’Brien told Newstalk he was “acutely aware” of the scale of the problem but “our Housing for All plan - which is only nine months old and which is taking effect right now - is certainly not a disaster, or anything like it... We intend to build more new social homes in 2022 than has been done in any other year in the history of the State.” More than 500 people attended the protest in Cork city where Solidarity Party TD Mick Barry was among those to address the crowd. Many young people “are suffering low pay, and nearly all of them are experiencing sky high rents,” he said. “Those two things together [are a] deadly combination, and it’s a reason why we need to, at the very least, freeze the rents and why we need a big increase in the minimum wage.” Government action would depend “on how much pressure they feel from below from ordinary people”, he said. “They said they couldn’t scrap the water charges and we built a massive movement of water charges and we forced them to scrap them. Same thing needs to be done in relation to cost of living now.” Cork North Central Sinn Féin TD Thomas Gould said: “What we are hearing from the Taoiseach Micheál Martin and Leo Varadkar is to wait for the Budget in October. I am telling you now the pensioners can’t wait until October.” A study from the Economic and Social Research Institute (ESRI) has estimated that nearly a third of households in the State are now living in energy poverty as a result of the recent surge in gas and electricity prices. In a report this week, the think tank also warned the Government that trying to mitigate the impact of rising energy prices by cutting indirect taxes on fuel — such as VAT, fuel duty, or the carbon tax — represented a poorly-targeted response as most of the aggregate gains would go to those on higher incomes. Instead, increases to welfare payments, the fuel allowance, and even lump-sum payments such as the household electricity credit were better targeted measures, the ESRI said, suggesting “a Christmas Bonus-style double welfare payment” had greater merit than tax cuts. Dublin march co-ordinator Eddie Conlon said the latest research, along with the breakdown of public sector pay talks, showed the cost of living crisis was “deepening” and that things would only get worse as prices continue to rise. “Urgent action is needed. Next October will be too late for many households as they slide further and further into financial distress,” he said. Minister of State Ossian Smyth said the crisis was being addressed, noting there had been “at least three occasions where major packages” were announced by the Government. Speaking to Saturday with Katie Hannon on RTÉ Radio, the Green Party TD said: “We have been addressing it, and there have been a billion euro in measures since the last Budget. And we are coming now to Budget 2023 which takes six months to prepare. “We are working out what are the best measures are to make but the billion euros of measures continue on until October, and in October we will have a new Budget which will cover many things.” On Thursday, Tánaiste Leo Varadkar said he had not ruled out bringing in additional measures to help cash-strapped households, but said there were no specific plans to do so before budget day. A similar cost of living march took place in London in Saturday with thousands calling for a change in how the British Government is handling the crisis. British trade union leaders joined frontline workers and community organisations on the streets of London in calling for a “better deal” for those struggling to cope with soaring inflation. Additional reporting from PA