Sir, – Angela Ruttledge’s article “The latte levy is a signal that we need to change our behaviour” (Opinion & Analysis, June 17th) states that “not all reusable cups are made from plastic”. It is obvious that given the commercial and practical aspects involved the vast bulk of “keep cups” will be made of hard plastic. It states that the 2021 study conducted by Ramboll (a reputable independent Danish consultancy company, also used by the European Commission), which suggests that switching to hard plastic keep cups would be more damaging for the environment than a recyclable paper cup, was commissioned by the European Paper Packaging Alliance. This does not make the scientific points untrue. The article states that “throw-away cups are one of the most common litter items found in nature, and due to our proximity to the sea, some of these cups end up in the marine environment”. Actually single use coffee cups account for less than 0.03 per cent (yes, that’s 3 per cent of 1 per cent) of the overall waste generated in Ireland; and paper cups are ranked 55th in the list of most commonly found items within marine waste, according to the single-use plastics EU directive assessment. The article states that “every year the people on this planet consume 500 billion single-use cups”. The source of this statistic is not given but if it is true and if these were replaced by hard plastic keep cups and these were reused 50 times before being disposed, (French studies estimate 30 to 50 uses), we should prepare for an extra 22 million tonnes of plastic (usually polycarbonate or Tritan which have limited recyclability and are fossil-oil-based materials) going to landfill in the planet every year. In this country alone, the impact of moving from single-use to multi-use would be the same as adding a million petrol cars. The Ramboll study findings demonstrate that reusables produce 2.8 times more carbon dioxide and consume 3.4 times more freshwater than single-use, paper-based products. In short, keep cups will add to our climate change problem. The article acknowledges the economic effects of the rising cost of living and the risk that many cafes and restaurants will crash out of the industry (further adding to high street vacancies in every city and town in Ireland). It is right on this point. There are estimated to be 15,000 employed in the coffee-related hospitality sector – the majority of coffee shop business is takeaway trade, many to-go only. UK levy impact research data demonstrates a maximum reusable cup uptake of 6 per cent (and 8 per cent ceasing to buy coffee), suggesting many traders would be forced to close. Proposed implementation of a coffee cup levy, after the Circular Economy Bill enactment, indiscriminately and disproportionately targets one product and one industry, paying scant reward to the innovation and waste collection initiatives already taken by industry stakeholders. Ms Ruttledge feels that “the latte levy is a signal that we need to change our behaviour” but this virtue signalling will unfortunately close many small labour-intensive businesses throughout the country and penalise coffee customers, as well as having an overall negative effect on the environment. Italy has chosen to exclude all single-use packaging with less than 10 per cent plastic from a single-use plastic related tax. France has chosen to reduce the amount of plastic by banning 100 per cent plastic cups, while allowing paper cups with up to 15 per cent plastic until end 2022, reducing to 8 per cent plastic content by 2024. Spain has chosen to take measures to reduce single-use packaging by way of plastic weight reduction targets (50 per cent by 2026, 70 per cent by 2030). Ireland needs to move to the most sustainable packaging and also invest in waste management infrastructure (public bins separating general waste and recyclable waste) which is currently happening in other EU countries and the UK. Green Party TD Ossian Smyth is the Minister of State in charge of the plans. He has confirmed it is the Government’s plan to eventually ban paper coffee cups altogether, while Government officials are trying to reassure café owners concerned about hygiene and safety that they can refuse reusable cups that are dirty or too flimsy. The regulations are to specify that outlets will have a right to insist on a paper cup (with the 20 cent levy imposed). This is not joined-up thinking and will make a battleground out of coffee outlets. To show that they are also worried about the proliferation of cheap plastic cups the Government is suggesting that these will be outlawed – so they want us to stick to the ¤10 or ¤15 keep cup for a ¤3.50 latte – not quite the same idea as the 70 cent “bag for life” for shopping. It is reassuring to know that Mr Smyth is concerned about café owners but apart from making them the “reusable coffee cup police”, he does not seem to appreciate the effect on their business when they must penalise unfortunate customers who may have forgotten their keep cup, or for example all impulse buyers, departing travellers at the airports or train stations, or unprepared tourists arriving into the country. To make the coffee industry feel a little less singled out we are being told that there are preparations for similar levies on cold drink cups next year, followed by one aimed at single-use food containers. Do we really want to use levies in this way, at a time when we are already being identified as the most expensive country (with Denmark) for consumer goods and services across the EU? This levy will seriously disadvantage them and close many. Of all the “green” measures being proposed by the Government, this “levy inflation” policy seems to be the most tone deaf and counter-productive. Our politicians can and must do better. – Yours, etc, COLM SORENSEN, Butlers Chocolate Cafes, Clonshaugh Business Park, Dublin 17.