British prime minister Boris Johnson faced a double blow to his authority after the Conservatives lost the Wakefield and Tiverton and Honiton byelections on the same night. The results prompted Oliver Dowden, the Tory party chairman, to resign. Labour took Wakefield, while the Liberal Democrats overturned a 24,000-plus majority to snatch Tiverton and Honiton. The Tiverton and Honiton result, where the Lib Dem candidate, Richard Foord, defeated Tory candidate Helen Hurford by 6,144 votes to take a constituency that has been Conservative in its various forms for well over a century, is believed to be the biggest numerical majority ever overturned in a byelection. A Labour win in Wakefield was more expected given Labour had consistently held the seat before the 2019 election, but the 4,925 majority for Simon Lightwood against Conservative candidate Nadeem Ahmed is a major boost for Labour leader Keir Starmer in the battle to regain “red wall” seats lost to the Tories in the last election. Mr Johnson is in Rwanda for the Commonwealth heads of government summit, before travelling to the G7 and Nato summits in Germany and Spain, keeping him out of the country for the next week. But in his absence, the double loss could push Tory backbenchers to try to restart efforts to oust him. In a letter to Mr Johnson, Mr Dowden said the byelections were “the latest in a run of very poor results for our party,” adding: “Our supporters are distressed and disappointed by recent events, and I share their feelings. “We cannot carry on with business as usual. Somebody must take responsibility and I have concluded that, in these circumstances, it would not be right for me to remain in office. Ed Davey, the Lib Dem leader, said the Tiverton and Honiton result meant it was time for Tory MPs to “finally do the right thing” and oust the prime minister. He said: “This should be a wake-up call for all those Conservative MPs propping up Boris Johnson. They cannot afford to ignore this result.” In his victory speech, Foord said: “The people of Tiverton and Honiton have spoken for Britain. They have sent a loud and clear message that it’ time for Boris Johnson to go.” Mr Starmer said the Wakefield win showed the country “has lost confidence in the Tories”, adding “this result is a clear judgment on a Conservative party that has run out of energy and ideas.” Earlier this month, Mr Johnson won a confidence vote called by Tory MPs after controversies over lockdown-breaking Downing Street parties, with 148 MPs seeking to remove Johnson and with 211 supporting him. Under party rules he is officially safe from a similar challenge for a year. However, these rules can be changed. The results arrived within less than ten minutes of each other, at either side of 4am. First came Wakefield, where Mr Lightwood won easily, securing 13,166 votes, against 8,241 for Mr Ahmed, a swing to Labour of just over 8 per cent. In Tiverton and Honiton, Mr Foord oversaw a massive 30 per cent swing to the Lib Dems, taking 22,537 votes against 16,393 for Ms Hurford. The Tory candidate, who had endured a sometimes tricky campaign, locked herself in a room set aside for media interviews at the west Yorkshire count, reportedly refusing to speak to the press. In his victory speech, Mr Foord thanked voters in the Devon constituency, including Labour supporters who, he said, had “lent” their backing to help him win. The scale of tactical voting, which saw Labour gain 1,562 votes in Tiverton and Honiton, while the Lib Dem candidate in Wakefield got just 508, will further alarm Conservative officials and MPs. The byelections were called after the respective MPs resigned in disgrace. Imran Ahmad Khan stepped down in Wakefield having been convicted of sexually assaulting a teenage boy, while Neil Parish quit in Tiverton and Honiton after watching pornography in the Commons. — Guardian