As you get older, you are supposed to become wiser — but “being wise” can be a euphemism for shutting up and presenting a falsely serene face to the world. Sheila Hancock knows, however, that your righteous indignation never deserts you, and when you’re older you have time to express it — at least to the ever-receptive page. A celebrated actor, married to even more famous John Thaw, she has received countless honours, and recently became a dame of the British empire. She does not sound like a dame, though. Her tone is down to earth and unpretentious. Indignation at inequality in the world, at crises (especially Brexit) manufactured by politicians, flows like a raging river through the engaging account of works and days. Her biography, a colourful story of a successful climb from humble origins to fame, is told mainly in the early sections. Gradually the diary documenting recent times takes over. The 2020-2021 entries, covering Covid, I found especially enjoyable. She loved London when it was deserted. “Isn’t London lovely? said Lola. It is. And it has taken an ugly virus to remind me how much I love it.” Anyone who had the pleasure of walking around Dublin during the lockdown will know just what she means. She is even-handed in her anger and her praise. For instance, having doubts about the right of that temple of privilege, Eton, to even exist, she is delighted that during the pandemic the headmaster Simon Henderson opened its doors electronically to 115,000 children, free. (Gosh! Who corrected their homework?) She is enraged that post-pandemic some old Etonians tried to get the enlightened headmaster replaced. And the beautiful lockdown-quiet streets of Chiswick, which most people loved, were given back to the polluting cars. (Watch out, Capel Street!) Best and most courageously of all, after all the chat and opinion, she is daring enough to offer a wise summation: “Success, as defined by the world, means little to me... it is completely irrelevant what I have, or have not, achieved for myself. The test is whether I have, like our parents, passed on something that will contribute to the future.” Who would disagree? An inspiring book, perfect for the train or the plane, or anywhere. Éilís Ní Dhuibhne’s latest books are Little Red and Other Stories (Blackstaff, 2020) and Look! It’s a Woman Writer! (Arlen House, 2021)