A Leaving Cert candidate who was forced to leave his history exam after developing acute appendicitis has been granted permission to sit an alternative paper next month. The student’s mother was initially told last week that he was not entitled to sit deferred exams in July on the basis that he had started the exam. State Examinations Commission rules  stipulate that while candidates who experience a serious medical condition are entitled to sit deferred exams, this does not apply to those who have commenced an exam. [ Examwatch 2022: Junior Cycle and Leaving Cert exam reaction ] “These are not second-chance examinations and are not available once a candidate has commenced an examination or completed an examination in the main sitting, even [if] the candidate maintains that they were unwell while taking the examinations,” according to an SEC document, published earlier this month. The student had to leave the history exam midway through, was taken to hospital in “extreme pain” according to his mother, and underwent surgery. The student’s situation attracted considerable publicity online after his mother shared details of his story on social media on Friday. A number of Government Ministers, including Minister of State for Special Education Josepha Madigan and Minister for Further and Higher Education Simon Harris, pledged to make inquiries on the mother’s behalf. It is understood that over the weekend education authorities told the family that if the student applied through the school to sit deferred exams, he would be eligible. On Saturday the boy’s mother confirmed that he has since been offered the chance to sit an alternative paper during a deferred set of exams in July. These deferred exams are aimed at students who could not attend the June exams due to bereavement, Covid-19 or a medical emergency. Informed sources told The Irish Times the fact the student had clear medical evidence of the need for the emergency procedure meant an exception was being made in this instance. The boy’s mother said that while she was thankful for the messages of support, the rules need to change to ensure more flexibility is shown in the case of “genuine, easily provable emergencies”. Epilepsy Ireland echoed her sentiments and said that while the case was not epilepsy-related, it showed why further provision “must be made for students who have medical emergencies during their exams”. The organisation has been campaigning for such flexibility for several years. It said the rules introduced by the SEC in advance of this year’s exams were a step in the right direction, but more needed to be done. The rules state that students who experience a serious accident, injury or illness which renders them unable to attend for their exams may be eligible for deferred exams, depending on the timing, nature and severity of their condition. Medical evidence  regarding the cause of absence from an exam must be submitted to the SEC within four working days of the date of the initial application. For exam integrity reasons, the SEC says the threshold for evidence is high, and that evidence will be required from a medical consultant or from a hospital. Epilepsy Ireland said it welcomed the fact that students who are unable to sit an exam due to a seizure beforehand can apply to the SEC for a deferred sitting later in June. However, it said rules to provide medical evidence within such a short time may be challenging, and expressed disappointment that students who have a seizure during an exam may not be able to access a deferred sitting.