Developer TIO (Targeted Investment Opportunities) has secured a further two occupiers for its North Dock office scheme in Dublin’s north docklands. Interactive Brokers and HEAnet join existing tenants Gilead Sciences and Blueface, both of which have established their EMEA headquarter operations at the development. Interactive Brokers Ireland Limited, is a European subsidiary of a leading Nasdaq-listed online brokerage firm, while HEAnet, Ireland’s national education and research network delivers high-speed internet connectivity and ICT shared services to all levels of the Irish education sector. More than one million students, researchers and staff rely on their network daily. Commenting on the lettings, Conor Fitzpatrick of JLL, who acted on behalf of TIO, said: “It is extremely encouraging to see the leasing momentum continue at North Dock.” Megan Burke of CBRE, who acted on behalf of Interactive Brokers, said: “We are delighted to have secured a prime waterfront opportunity for our client’s expanding Dublin operations that aligns with their ESG objectives.” HEAnet, for its part, was advised by Fergal Burke of Avison Young. North Dock bears the distinction of being Dublin’s first nZEB (nearly zero energy building) office development. The scheme extends to 18,766sq m (202,000sq ft) in total, distributed between North Dock One (8,826sq m/95,000sq ft) and North Dock Two (9,940sq m/107,000sq ft). Located in Dublin’s docklands, immediately adjacent to Point Square and the 3Arena, the scheme is surrounded by a broad range of amenities including two hotels, student housing, the Odeon Cinema, and an increasing number of restaurants and coffee shops. The number of residential opportunities in the immediate area continues to grow with a further 550 apartments being completed by developer Johnny Ronan’s Ronan Group Real Estate (RGRE) at Spencer Place and 471 apartments set to be delivered as part of Kennedy Wilson’s Coopers Cross development. Quite apart from its riverfront location, North Dock is well-connected in terms of public transport. The Luas terminus at Point Square is situated immediately to the rear of the building and connects to the Dart and mainline railway service at Connolly Station as well as the bus services at Busáras. International travellers, meanwhile, can access Dublin Airport within 15 minutes via the Port Tunnel which also eases the approach for car users coming from the north or west of the city. Those coming from the southside can access the scheme via the East Link bridge, which is located right outside the front door. TIO is one of the most prolific developers in the Dublin docklands. It has previously developed and sold 76 Sir John Rogersons Quay, the Grant Thornton HQ on City Quay, 5 Hanover Quay which is occupied by Aptiv and DocuSign, and the adjoining OPUS residential apartments at 6 Hanover Quay. Joint agents JLL and Savills are currently marketing the remaining space at North Dock which ranges from a 334sq m (3,600sq ft) eighth-floor penthouse to a single floorplate of 2,694sq m (29,000sq ft) which is a rarity in the Dublin office market. TIO says it expects the leasing momentum at the scheme to continue with a further 1,858sq m (20,000sq ft) already reserved and several floors under offer.