Minister for Foreign Affairs Simon Coveney has responded to UK prime minister Boris Johnson’s assertion that the legislation to set aside aspects of the Northern Ireland protocol is “not a big deal”. Legislation to unilaterally amend the Northern Ireland protocol will be introduced in the British parliament this evening amid controversy over whether the legislation will break international law. “This is a big deal, unfortunately. I wish it wasn’t,” Mr Coveney said on Monday afternoon at Government Buildings. Mr Coveney insisted that the UK move was “a breach of international law”, which British ministers have denied. “I don’t think there’s any other way to describe it. If you are legislating to set aside the elements of an international treaty, which is international law, well then you’re breaking international law,” “Politically, this is an act of bad faith,” he said. He said the UK government had decided to go against majority opinion in Northern and Ireland and break its word to the Irish government and to break an international treaty “that it signed, designed and ratified with the EU.” He said that the British claimed that its move was to protect the peace process. “It’s nothing of the sort,” he said. Mr Coveney said that the EU would be “forced to respond in a way we don’t want.” Mr Coveney also said the move risked collapsing the protocol altogether. “The risk is by unilaterally acting the way they are now, they potentially risk collapsing the protocol because I don’t believe the EU can accept the approach the British government Earlier Taoiseach Micheal Martin warned the UK government unilaterally overriding the Northern Ireland protocol was a “very serious issue because it goes to the heart of the issue of trust”. Mr Martin said the European Union needs to know it can trust the UK on whatever future deal might emerge over the Northern Ireland protocol, but this was going to be very difficult if the UK reneges on the existing deal. Mr Johnson insisted the legislation would introduce “relatively simple” bureaucratic changes and warned it would be a “gross overreaction” if Brussels sought to retaliate by triggering a trade war. Asked about these comments, Mr Martin dismissed Mr Johnson’s attempt to play down what is being proposed. “Well, you know the British government has a tendency to ‘big up’ decisions like this and then once they announce them, to try and trivialise them – essentially, announcing the breaching of an international treaty is pretty serious stuff and can’t be put to one side,” he said. “That is because it is a very serious issue because it goes to the heart of the issue of trust, and the European Union needs to have a trusted partner to negotiate with – the next deal has to be one, if there is to be further negotiation and a deal, people need to know that it is going to be adhered to. “For a country like the United Kingdom to renege on an international treaty is something that does present a new low point because the natural expectation of democratic countries, like ourselves, the UK, and all across Europe, is that we honour international agreements that we enter into. “And this agreement was ratified by the British parliament, it was approved by the British prime minister, and in our view the only way to resolve issues around the operation of the protocol is to have substantive negotiations between the United Kingdom government and the European Union.” The European Commission has made clear that if such a Bill becomes law it will trigger retaliatory trade sanctions, and that the legislation’s introduction will adversely affect all aspects of the EU’s relationship with Britain. Mr Johnson told LBC Radio this morning: “What we have to respect – this is the crucial thing – is the balance and the symmetry of the Belfast/Good Friday Agreement. “We have to understand there are two traditions in Northern Ireland, broadly two ways of looking at the border issues. One community at the moment feels very, very estranged from the way things are operating and very alienated. “We have just got to fix that. It is relatively simple to do it, it’s a bureaucratic change that needs to be made. “Frankly, it’s a relatively trivial set of adjustments in the grand scheme of things.” [ Slowly but unmistakably, Ireland and Britain are growing apart ] Mr Johnson disagreed with claims that the move breaks international law, arguing that “our higher and prior legal commitment as a country is the Belfast/Good Friday Agreement and to the balance and stability of that agreement”. Mr Coveney spoke briefly to British foreign secretary Liz Truss about the legislation this morning, his spokesman said, at the request of Ms Truss, who confirmed her government’s intention to publish the controversial Bill today. He also used a Twitter post to suggest the UK was seeking to “deliberately ratchet up tension with an EU seeking compromise”. He reiterated that the legislation would “breach the UK’s commitments under international law, the Brexit Withdrawal Agreement and Northern Ireland Protocol” and would be “deeply damaging to relationships on these islands and between the UK and EU”, the Department of Foreign Affairs said in a brief statement following the call. Mr Coveney also said the decision to dismantle the protocol - which was agreed by the British government - “marks a particular low point in the UK’s approach to Brexit, especially as Secretary Truss has not engaged with negotiations with the EU in any meaningful way since February”. He said the protocol was the negotiated solution for Northern Ireland which had been ratified by the British parliament, to the “hard Brexit pursued by the UK government”. “The UK’s unilateral approach is not in the best interest of Northern Ireland and does not have the consent or support of the majority of people or business in Northern Ireland. Far from fixing problems, this legislation will create a whole new set of uncertainties and damage relationships,” Mr Coveney’s statement said. In a tweet, Ms Truss said she remained “open to negotiations with the EU, but we cannot wait to fix the issues facing the people of NI”. Separately, Ms Truss also spoke on Monday to Maros Sefcovic, the EU’s chief negotiator, to inform him of the publication of the legislation today. “Our preference is a negotiated solution, but EU must be willing to change the protocol itself,” she said in another tweet. Afterwards, Mr Sefcovic tweeted: “The EU has always paid utmost attention to the impact Brexit has on NI, offering workable solutions. Unilateral action is damaging to mutual trust & a formula for uncertainty.” The Bill is expected to give British ministers the power to scrap checks on goods moving from Britain to Northern Ireland, and to remove the requirement for businesses in the North to follow EU regulations. Under pressure from eurosceptic Conservative backbenchers, Mr Johnson is understood to have included clauses in the Bill that explicitly disapply British domestic legislation ratifying the withdrawal treaty. The DUP is under pressure from the Conservative UK government to nominate a speaker for the Northern Ireland Assembly this week in response to the introduction of the Bill. Conservative MPs who voted against Mr Johnson’s leadership last week are organising opposition to the Bill, and the PoliticsHome website on Sunday published details of an internal memo making the case against it. “Breaking international law to rip up the prime minister’s own treaty is damaging to everything the UK and Conservatives stand for. We are a country that acts with integrity and honours the agreements we sign,” the memo said. The Northern Ireland Protocol Bill will give ministers powers to override elements of the protocol, which was jointly agreed by Mr Johnson’s government and the EU as part of the Brexit Withdrawal Agreement to keep the Irish land Border free-flowing by reducing checks on the movement of goods across the Irish Sea. This could include establishing a “green lane” to remove all customs processes for goods moving within the United Kingdom and enable the frictionless movement of agri-food goods staying in Northern Ireland. The arrangements instead require regulatory checks and customs declarations on goods moving between Great Britain and Northern Ireland, because they could flow through the open border with Ireland into the EU’s single market.