Ukrainian troops repelled a Russian attack on the southern outskirts of Lysychansk, the last fully Ukrainian-controlled city in the region of Luhansk, the area’s governor said on Friday. However, Serhiy Gaidai wrote on the Telegram messaging app that Russia had taken control of the village of Mykolaivka, located near a key highway to Lysychansk, which has been the focus of heavy fighting. Fighting continues, he added, in the battleground twin city of Severodonetsk, where Russia has advanced slowly over several weeks. Mr Gaidai said that all Lysychansk was within reach of Russian fire and that Ukrainian troops there might retreat to new positions to avoid being trapped. Russian forces were trying to encircle Ukrainian troops defending Lysychansk, senior Ukrainian defence official Oleksiy Gromov said in a briefing on Thursday. Russian-backed separatist forces said there was fierce fighting under way around Ukrainian positions in Hirske, which lies on the western side of the main north-south road to Lysychansk, and Zolote, another settlement to the south. Ukrainian forces were defending Severodonetsk and nearby Zolote and Vovchoyrovka, Mr Gaidai said, but Russian troops had captured Loskutivka and Rai-Oleksandrivka to the south. Hundreds of civilians are trapped in a chemical plant in Severodonetsk. [ Ukraine’s Zelenskiy welcomes ‘historic rapprochement’ with Ireland in EU candidacy decision ] On the southern front, Russian forces struck Ukrainian army fuel tanks and military equipment near Mykolaiv with high-precision weapons, Russia’s defence ministry said, quoted by the Interfax news agency. A river port and shipbuilding centre just off the Black Sea, Mykolaiv has been a bastion against Russian efforts to push West towards Ukraine’s main port city of Odesa. Authorities in the small town of Derhachi, to the northwest of Kharkiv, said early on Friday that heavy Russian shelling had knocked out most of the electrical and natural gas supply. Kharkiv, in northeastern Ukraine, is the country’s second-biggest city. President Volodymyr Zelenskiy has urged Ukraine’s allies to speed up shipments of heavy weapons to match Russia on the battlefield. Ukraine’s defence minister said HIMARS multiple rocket systems had arrived from the United States. With a range of 70km (44 miles), the systems can challenge the Russian artillery batteries that have bludgeoned Ukrainian cities from afar. On Thursday, Mr Zelenskiy said Ukraine’s formal candidature to join the European Union was a big step towards strengthening Europe at a time when Russia was testing its freedom and unity. Mr Zelenskiy told EU leaders in Brussels their decision to accept Kyiv’s candidacy was among the most important for Ukraine since it broke from the Soviet Union 31 years ago. “But this decision is not just being made for the benefit of Ukraine. It is the biggest step towards strengthening Europe that could have been made right now, in our time, and when the Russian war is testing our ability to preserve freedom and unity,” he said. — Reuters