Gardaí have broken up a large scale Kinahan drug smuggling operation which involved converting cocaine to converted to liquid form and storing it in champagne bottles. Seven people were arrested and over €2 million worth of drugs seized during a series of raids in Dublin on Wednesday and Thursday. It is understood three of the suspects detained in the city centre attempted to flee by swimming across the Liffey but were caught by gardaí. “The outcome of operational activity undertaken by the Garda National Drugs and Organised Crime Bureau, supported by a number of other specialised units within the Garda Síochána, over the past twenty-four hours, is very significant and reflects exceptional policing skills along with dedication and bravery on the part of the personnel involved,” Assistant Commissioner John O’Driscoll. The raids took place in Beaumont, Palmerstown and in the Dublin 2 area. The operation also saw a vehicle being stopped on the M50 by the Garda National Drugs & Organised Crime Bureau with support from a Special Crime Task Force. During the Beaumont raid gardaí found wine and champagne bottles which they believe contain cocaine in liquid form. This is the first time such a smuggling method has been detected in Ireland. As well as cocaine, gardaí also seized cannabis and heroin along with large sums of cash believed to be the proceeds of drug trafficking. Communications devices, money counting machines and devices for vacuum packing money and drugs were also seized. Mr O’Driscoll said the operation is the result of links forged by gardaí with international law enforcement agencies across many countries. “Again today the Garda Síochána and the people of Ireland reap the benefits of the Garda Síochána’s outreach at a global level.” He said people “believed to operate at a significant level within the world of organised crime” have been identified and arrested. “A drug trafficking route has been identified and disrupted and a new method of concealing controlled substances has been identified and exposed,” the Assistant Commissioner added.