The State’s tax clampdown on medical professionals appears to be continuing, with several doctors and dentists prominent on the latest list of tax defaulters, which included nine settlements for a total of €11.6 million. Revenue’s list of settlements that were agreed in the first quarter of the year also includes almost €10 million owed by a Louth fuel supplier, BK Oils. It is currently in liquidation with less than €500 in its bank account. None of the €9.98 million settlement with Glendalough Stores, which owns the fuel supply business, had been repaid to the State by the end of March. The company, whose directors include Dundalk-based Bernard Kirk and Seamus Lambe, has been in liquidation for more than nine years. The debt to Revenue, which arose following an investigation into the company’s VAT returns, is not mentioned in the latest report from the company’s liquidator. Hugh Gordon, a Galway-based orthodontist, is named on the list in relation to an income tax settlement of €250,000. All of the cash appears to have been repaid to the State. The website for Mr Gordon’s business says he has traded in Galway since 1999. Mayo-based dentist, Paul Murphy, who lives at an address in Castlebar, is listed in relation to a settlement of more than €120,000 for income tax. Ammar Alhassan, a general practitioner in Saggart, west Dublin, is named on the list as having owed €175,000 in income tax and penalties, following an audit. The final tax defaulter named with links to the medical profession is Dublin service provider, Domessin Consulting, which is owned by Khalid Khan. It owed more than €158,000 for under-declaration of employment taxes, but the cash has been repaid. Among the settlements that were still outstanding to taxpayers at the end of March is more than €313,000 for under-declaration of VAT by Cork-based quantity surveyor, Donagh Callanan. Bagnelstown, Carlow property developer and businessman, Stephen Murphy, is also listed as still owing more than €267,000 of a €357,000 settlement for under-declaring income tax.