The Dublin-based company that operates the British & Irish Lions rugby tours made a profit last year of £8.2 million (€9.6m) in spite of the challenges posed by the pandemic, which resulted in the three test matches in South Africa being played without spectators in the stadiums. Latest accounts for British & Irish Lions show that it recorded turnover of £20.1 million (€23.4m) in the year to the end of September 2021. This compared with income of just €886,868 in the previous year. The company’s revenues would typically be weighed towards the year of a tour – with the Lions touring every four years to one of Australia, New Zealand or South Africa – and would normally include income from trips organised for Lions fans and associated ticket income. In 2017, when the Lions toured New Zealand, the company made a profit of £7.8 million on revenue of £22.1 million. The entity is owned by the Irish, English, Scottish and Welsh rugby unions, and drew its income last year predominantly from sponsorship, broadcasting, merchandising and licensing rights. It had a record 25 commercial partners in 2021, including Vodafone, Sky Sports, DHL and TikTok. Its revenue streams were “not greatly reduced” as a result of the impact of Covid restrictions imposed on partnership rights. The Lions squad featured eight Irish players, with South Africa winning the test series 2-1. It is understood that £4 million of the profit from last year will be used to fund the day-day running costs of the Lions until the tour to Australia in 2025. The other £4 million has been used to cover losses incurred in 2019 and 2020 (a loss of €842,158 was recorded) and this year. Commenting on the financial results, Ben Calveley, managing director of the British & Irish Lions, said the unions were “really satisfied” with the performance of the company given the “challenges we faced in 2021 and the real prospect of the tour to South Africa not taking place”. “It was a unique year and tour but one which we can reflect on with great pride. What we achieved in the end demonstrates the power of our brand and esteem in which it is held. It is also testament to the sheer dedication and unrelenting support of everyone associated with the Lions, including players, coaches, backroom teams, support staff and our unions and partners,” he said. “The British & Irish Lions brand and organisation has never been stronger, and we are looking forward with optimism at what the future has to offer. Planning is well under way for the 2025 tour to Australia.” The British & Irish Lions doubled its staff numbers to 12 during last year, with salary costs more than doubling to just under €1.8 million. Average pay to staff amounted to just more than €149,000. Looking to the future, British & Irish Lions is set to launch a membership programme for fans later this year that will provide digital content and live events in the years outside the tour. It is also exploring the possibility of a women’s tour. A three-part documentary series of the South African tour is due to be aired on ITV on June 19th. The board of the British & Irish Lions was chaired by former England rugby international Jason Leonard. Its directors also included Philip Browne, the ex-CEO of the IRFU, who stepped down at the end of last year, former Welsh international Ieuan Evans, and ex-Scottish star Gavin Hastings.