Minister Catherine Martin has said it would be inappropriate for her to meet RTÉ to discuss Liveline programmes on transgender issues. She made the remarks in the Dáil after Solidarity TD Mick Barry asked her what engagement she has had with the broadcaster and Dublin Pride following the ending of their partnership as a result of the controversial programme. RTÉ previously said it was “disappointed” with Dublin Pride’s decision to end their partnership. “Public discussion — sometimes uncomfortable, difficult and contentious — is central to RTÉ's prescribed purpose. RTÉ is acutely aware that discussions on issues such as gender and identity are deeply personal to many,” said the broadcaster. Mr Barry asked Ms Martin what measures she intends to take to “ensure that trans people are respected and their rights are upheld in the media”. Ms Martin said she wanted to “acknowledge that the announcement by Dublin Pride last week that they are terminating their media partnership with RTÉ reflects the hurt and anger within the LGBTI+ community and beyond it.” She added that she is “proud of how far Ireland has come in recent years in terms of the great respect offered to minorities”. “I am committed to supporting LGBTI+ people across all areas under the remit of my department,” Ms Martin said and referred to €55,000 in support her Department is providing to Dublin Pride festival this year. She said the independence of public service broadcasters is set out in legislation and “for that reason, it would not be appropriate for me to meet with RTÉ in respect of an individual programme”. “However, I’m strongly of the view that media policy and regulation does and must continue to play an important role in ensuring respect and protection for trans people and other vulnerable groups,” she said. Ms Martin said her role as minister is to ensure “there is a robust statutory framework in place” and the Broadcasting Authority of Ireland (BAI) is the regulator. She said it has two codes of particular relevance - one related to fairness, objectivity and impartiality in news and one on programme standards “designed to ensure that the representation of persons and groups in society is appropriate” and “does not stigmatise, condone discrimination or incite hatred”. She said: “All broadcasters in Ireland must ensure that their outpost is compliant with the law and with any codes and rules made by the BAI”. She said there is a robust complaints procedure in place with possible financial sanctions. “We must ensure that all our people feel safe, valued and equal in our country and this is particularly the case where people are members of a very small and consequently very vulnerable minority as is the case for trans people.” “Any conversations involving such a small minority must be carried out with great care and with absolute respect,” she said. Mr Barry said “divisive, manufactured so-called debate has been imported to this country now from the US and the UK”. He added that “two weeks of targeted abuse of the LGBTQ community in general and the transgender community in particular has been the result. And shamefully the national broadcaster has been central to the whole thing.” Mr Barry claimed that RTÉ and the “corporate media more generally” have “covered up” how four people excluded from a National Women’s Council event had announced their intention to disrupt the event by “by targeting a trans person for hostile criticism”. He claimed RTÉ has has been “let off the hook” by the Oireachtas Committee on Media which cancelled an invitation to a meeting on Wednesday. The committee said on Monday that it was advised by RTÉ “that a number of formal complaints” regarding three Liveline were being dealt with under the relevant statutory and regulatory provisions. It said: “The Committee recognises the right of complainants to be afforded due process in such proceedings and do not propose to consider this matter further at this time.” Mr Barry asked Ms Martin if she agreed the invitation should be re-issued. Ms Martin again set out broadcasting regulations designed to prevent ministers intervening in content broadcast on TV and radio and said it “rightly” limits the degree to which she can comment on the issue. Mr Barry later said he is opposed to debating anyone’s human rights. He said he is “in favor of more discussion on gender identity issues, and I’m in favor of asking hard questions”. He asked why the gender identity adolescent clinic at Crumlin Hospital not been operational for nearly 18 months and why is there a waiting list of more than six years at the National Gender Service in Loughlinstown. He asked why this service “operating on an outdated model of care” and “why is there no recognition for non-binary trans people?” He also asked why there are no public health service options for gender affirming surgery. Mr Barry said he hoped Pride events are well attended this month and the Trans Pride event on July 16th is “a huge success”. Ms Martin also said she hopes both are well attended while outlining the support her Department offers to the LGBTI+ community.