Kerry’s clash with Mayo headlines the All-Ireland SFC quarter-final draw as sides’ pathways to the competition’s final have been revealed, as all four quarter-finals will be played at Croke Park on the weekend of June 25th and 26th. Kerry initially were drawn against Cork but had to come out of the hat once again since clashes between provincial rivals had already been ruled out by organisers. Cork ended up drawing Dublin, with the winner of that clash taking on whoever emerges from Kerry vs Mayo. In the other two ties, Connacht champions Galway will take on Armagh after they blew past Donegal in the qualifiers, while top dogs in Ulster Derry have been pitted against Clare. The winners of those two ties will clash in the other semi-final. Derry will play Clare first at Croke Park on Saturday, June 25th at 3.45pm, followed by Cork against Dublin at 6pm. On Sunday, June 26th, Armagh will play Galway at 1.45pm, with Kerry playing Mayo at 4pm. Kerry last met Mayo in April’s Division One final where David Clifford’s 1-6 propelled them to a crushing 3-19 to 0-13 win. Given that result and Mayo’s recent patchy form with a poor performance in their recent win over Kildare, the Munster champions will be likely favourites. Dublin will also be heavily favoured given their championship resurgence following what was a poor league campaign that saw them relegated from Division One. The two last met in the championship back in 2019 where Dublin coasted to a 5-18 1-17 victory in the quarter-final group stage at Croke Park. The All-Ireland football semi-finals will take on the weekend of July 9th-10th, with the winners of Derry-Clare and Galway-Armagh taking place at 5.30pm on Saturday, July 9th, with the winners of Dublin/Cork and Kerry/Mayo taking place at 3.30pm on Sunday, July 10th. Elsewhere, the final of the Tailteann Cup will take place on Saturday, July 9th at 3pm. The winner of Cavan against Sligo will play the winner of Offaly against Westmeath in the final. Derry v Clare — Croke Park — Saturday, June 25th, 3.45pm — Live on Sky Sports Dublin v Cork — Croke Park — Saturday, June 25th, 6pm — Live on Sky Sports Galway v Armagh — Croke Park — Sunday, June 26th, 1.45pm — Live on RTÉ Kerry v Mayo — Croke Park — Sunday, June 26th, 4pm — Live on RTÉ Galway/Armagh v Derry/Clare — Saturday, July 9th, 5.30pm — Live on RTÉ/Sky Sports Kerry/Mayo v Dublin/Cork — Sunday, July 10th, 3.30pm — Live on RTÉ/Sky Sports Cavan/Sligo v Westmeath/Offaly — Saturday, July 9th, 3pm — Live on RTÉ