When 24 Russell Avenue was last on the market in 2015, it sat in limbo for some time. It was eventually purchased by a young couple in their late 20s, one of whom is an architect. “It was hard to see past the mess, and it had red ceilings, but we were after a doer-upper and this was just perfect,” says its architect owner. The couple cleared out the property and lived there for about two years, after they paid €296,000 for it in 2016, to get a feel for what they might do. At that time the house measured 80sq m (850sq ft) and had a one-storey lean-to at the rear. They ripped the entire back off the house and replaced it with a two-storey extension, which now gives a fine kitchen with a hidden utility and bathroom at garden level. Upstairs gained a bedroom and good-sized shower room. It now measures 104sq m (1,119sq ft) in total. The previous principal bedroom that lies to the front of the property was split in two, and now gives a main bedroom which is clutter free as a dressing room of the same size was gained by the divide. In terms of energy upgrade, the house now has a good Ber of B3 after the floor, which now has underfloor heating, was insulated. Walls were pared back to brick and were dry-lined, while the attic was also insulated. There is a nice feature in the dining room, whereby a sheet of glass was installed instead of a wall so you can now see out to the staircase. “When we were doing the work it threw so much light into the room from the rooflight upstairs so we decided to put glass there rather than lose the light by replacing the wall”. Solid oak parquet flooring now runs through the hall, living and dining areas, and as well as giving a lovely warm feel it is bang on trend. In the kitchen, large terrazzo tiles, which the couple imported from the UK, were used and give a contemporary feel beneath the streamlined units. This area is flooded with light thanks to a large patio door that leads out to a small courtyard, and with clever design a utility and bathroom lie at an angle off the kitchen, so are hidden from view. The couple are off to Co Meath to commence another project. “We love the fact that the house is near Croke Park and also so close to town. When we bought here we had two cars, but as we both walk to work, we sold one as it was more than we needed.” Number 24 Russell Avenue, a totally renovated three-bedroom house in turnkey condition, is now on the market through Sherry FitzGerald seeking €525,000.