Mountshannon Road is a popular spot for buyers who are in search of the types of period houses found in Ranelagh and Rathmines but may find themselves priced out of the Dublin 6 market. The area, on a quiet mature road in Kilmainham — just around the corner from St James’s Hospital — is served by a good transport network to the city, with a Luas red line stop at the hospital and direct bus routes to town. It is tucked off the South Circular Road, near Heuston Station, and the M50 and M7 motorways are just minutes away by car. No 18 has been fully refurbished in a balance that marries original features such as period fireplaces, cornicing and coving with contemporary conveniences. It extends to 145sq m (1,561sq ft). Inside the front hall lies a living room full of light, thanks to a large bay window. Splashes of colour from a burnt-orange sofa are echoed in contemporary striped blinds, and this bold use of colour is picked up in a funky stair runner that works really well against the muted tones of the walls. From the living room, double doors lead to a contemporary Bulthaup kitchen, which itself leads to a bright dining area, as this space is flooded with light thanks to the southerly aspect of the rear garden. A utility and office lie to the rear, overlooking the landscaped garden, which has been designed to be low maintenance while giving pops of year-round colour. A room upstairs is really the show-stopper of this colourful home. Though originally a bedroom, and spanning the entire width of the property, it is laid out as a formal drawing room, warmed by an open fireplace. It would be an easy enough job to turn it back to a bedroom by removing a wall of shelving, but it really makes the house. Three further bedrooms lie upstairs, with another double on the first floor, while a large double and a single — in use as an office — lie on the top floor. The property benefits from access via a private lane off Mayfield Road. The BER of F is low considering the property has been refurbished, and though it is in excellent condition, this will be something that prospective buyers may want to address. No 18 is on the market through Sherry FitzGerald seeking €845,000.