Julie Peelo, who has seen handbags she designed worn by celebrities including Beyoncé, Jennifer Lopez and Jessica Biel, opened her own Dublin-based design studio, Peelo Accessories in 2020. She has previously worked with John Rocha, Marni in Milan, John Galliano in Paris and Diane von Furstenberg in New York. www.peelo.ie Are you a saver or a spender? Since my first job I have tried to convince my dad, a chartered accountant, that I am a saver but he knows I am a spender. Do you shop around for better value? Yes, it is a valuable skill in the fashion business and something I have honed over years of negotiating with leather tanneries and factories. In my day-to-day life, however, I’m probably not as good at shopping around. What has been your most extravagant purchase and how much did it cost? A very expensive handbag I bought in New York. Someone else is now the proud owner of it as I left it in a taxi following a night out! What purchase have you made that you consider the best value for money? We have a lovely house in Malahide that we bought in 2018, but I would not just quantify its value in money terms. It’s a great place to live and we are really happy here. There is an abundance of sports clubs for our kids and lots of nice walks. How did you prefer to shop during the Covid-19 restrictions – online or local? A bit of both. Online food shopping is so handy with a young family. It saves me dragging the kids around the supermarket and getting nagged for sweets. I also like to support the local butchers, cafes and restaurants. Do you haggle over prices? Yes. Fashion is international and I have worked and haggled in India, Korea, China and all across Europe. How has the Covid-19 crisis changed your spending habits? I have become far more conscious of supporting Irish brands and local businesses. I think this is something we should all be doing as it really helps keep money within the economy, creates employment and generates tax revenue. Do you invest in shares? Yes, I do through my pension, but I also hope my business will give a good return over time. Cash or card? Card helps me track my expenses. Cash lasts minutes in my hands. What was the last thing you bought and was it good value for money? A trip at Easter to Legoland Windsor in the UK with my husband Seàn and our three kids. It was expensive but worth the experience. Have you ever successfully saved up for a relatively big purchase? Yes, my first apartment in Paris. I was working and living in Paris and fell in love with the city. I saved up the deposit to buy in the beautiful 11th arrondissement and adored it. Have you ever lost money? Aside from the handbag, nothing comes to mind, but I do believe you have to take risks in life. You’re not going to win every time. Are you a gambler and if so have you ever had a big win? Every collection as a designer is a gamble. Colour, texture, styles and shapes all change constantly and you are gambling at least a year ahead of the market. Actual gambling? One memorable punt was on One For Arthur in the 2017 Grand National. Our eldest son is called Arthur, so we placed our bet and could not believe it when the horse romped home at 14/1. It paid for a few drinks that evening! Is money important to you? Yes, we are fortunate so far in family and health, but we know that financial security can only come through luck and hard work. How much money do you have on you now? Let me see… Oh, I found €10! I’m delighted with that. In conversation with Tony Clayton-Lea