Ireland under-20 head coach Richie Murphy is fully versed with the transient nature of age-grade squads in personnel terms, but he still might have allowed himself a wry smile when it emerged that two thirds of his Grand Slam winning ‘starters’ would not be available for an eight-team tournament in Italy. The Irish team will face pool matches against France, South Africa and England in Verona and depending on the final standings will then play a crossover game with one of Italy, Scotland, Wales, and Georgia from the other group. Injuries have decimated Murphy’s resources with only 14 of the 31-man squad having experience of a matchday 23 in the Six Nations. There are 10 players from the Ireland under-19 squad that drew a Test series 1-1 – the games were played in Belfast and Dublin – against France in April. Props Jack Boyle – Leinster want him for preseason training – and Rory McGuire, secondrow Mark Morrissey, number eight James Culhane, halfbacks Matthew Devine and Charlie Tector, centres Ben Brownlee, Ben Carson and Jude Postlethwaite are all missing. Chay Mullins is with the Ireland Sevens squad while fullback Patrick Campbell had the misfortune to sustain an injury at the back end of a training session last Tuesday. Murphy explained: “The majority picked up injuries through the back end of the season. There are two guys that we have left out for particular reasons but the rest of them unfortunately are injuries. “It is very much a new team. We’ve five guys back from that starting XV, probably another maybe five that were in the 23 so those guys know the level that is needed. “We haven’t started from scratch; the guys have worked really hard over the last few weeks but it’s going to be a tough opener. Let’s put it that way, against France and South Africa within a five-day turnaround,” especially when considering that the temperature in Verona will be in the mid-30s.” Murphy admitted that his Grand Slam side had lost “big names and big personalities” but the tournament would serve as an opportunity to look at some of the talent that will be available for next season’s Six Nations. “We are hoping that that is going to be good enough to be very competitive over there. “There is a big target on our backs going over as Grand Slam champions. That is a tag that some of these young guys are going to have to wear even though they haven’t been involved in that Six Nations. “There’s no double we’re a little shy on where we’d like to be, but it is what it is, and our job at under-20s is about development. It’s a great opportunity for these young lads and what better test than playing France, South Africa and England. It’s a good challenge.” Reuben Crothers, who led Ireland superbly in the Six Nations, remains as captain while another outstanding figure in that campaign, hooker James McCormick, will fill the role of vice-captain. The coaching team is unaltered with Murphy assisted by Jimmy Duffy (forwards), Mark Sexton (backs) and Willie Faloon (defence). Ireland Under-20 squad: Adam McNamee (Malone), Charlie Irvine (QUB), Conor O’Tighearnaigh (UCD), Darragh McSweeney (Shannon), Diarmuid Mangan (UCD), Dominic Rhys Hey (Hartpury), George Hadden (Gorey), George Shaw (Cardiff University), James McCormick (Ballymena), James McNabney (Ballymena), Joseph Mawhinney (Ballymena), Josh Hanlon (Ballynahinch), Kieran Ryan (Shannon), Lorcan McLoughlin (QUB), Oisin Michel (Lansdowne), Ronan O’Sullivan (Highfield), Reuben Crothers (Ballynahinch, capt), Scott Wilson (QUB), Aitzol King (Clontarf), Andrew O’Mahony (UCC), Daniel Hawkshaw (Clontarf), David Dooley (MU Barnhall), D O’Grady (UCD), Ethan Coughlan (Shannon), Fionn Gibbons (UCD), Tony Butler (Garryowen), George Coomber (UCC), Michael Moloney (UCD), Reece Malone (Loughborough University/Ballynahinch), Sam Prendergast (Lansdowne), Shay McCarthy (Young Munster). Ireland Under-20 fixtures (all times Irish) Friday, June 24th: France v Ireland, Payanini Centre, Verona (8.0) Wednesday, June 29th: Ireland v South Africa, Payanini Centre, Verona (8.0) Tuesday, July 5th: Ireland v England, Payanini Centre, Verona (8.0).