Global data centre company Park Place Technologies has opened a support and operations centre at Blarney Business Park in Co Cork. The group said the new 24,500sq ft facility 6km north of Cork city will “accommodate Park Place’s growth” and allow employee expansion, which it said is projected to double by 2024. It currently employs 50 people, and the facility has capacity for 170 staff. The building will also offer “a landmark facility for clients, and provide a high-quality meeting space”. The group said work positions were being filled with “local talent”, and that recruitment would continue for “highly skilled engineering and technology positions”. These include multiple roles such as support centre representatives, advanced engineering technical support, and buyer planners. Customer support at the facility is available in all European languages. The company opened its first office in Cork in 2018. Park Place managing director for EMEA and APAC Ian Shearer said Ireland was “a prime destination from which to serve our European and global customer base”. Park Place president and chief executive Chris Adams said it “represents a modest investment for Ireland, but Ireland represents a major piece of our global investment in customer and employee experience”. “As Park Place gains more experience in nearly every region of the globe, it is clear to us that Ireland is a special strategic partner; and the people and business community of Co Cork are truly world class in their collaboration, tech skills and vision for the future.” He said the new building in Blarney Business Park represented “a direct investment” in Ireland, which will host business and local community events, “benefiting the wider community in Co Cork in an interactive and accessible way”. He added: “Park Place does not want to be viewed as another US business setting up shop for itself. We do things differently when we invest in a community, and we want to prove ourselves as a part of the lives of the people of Co Cork.” IDA Ireland technology division department manager Anne-Marie Tierney Le-Roux said Park Place has developed into “an important member” of the southwest region’s “established tech cluster”. Taoiseach Micheál Martin, who is a local TD, said the development was “very positive” for Cork and for the broader region. “The Government will continue to work to support our thriving technology sector and leading companies such as Park Place Technologies as we build on the record 2.5 million people now in employment in Ireland and ensure continued opportunities in the future.”