Irish healthcare administrative support firm RelateCare is to create 280 jobs at its new facility in Tralee, it has announced. The first 30 of the 280 new staff have been hired and are working at the Tralee hub of the group which is located on the campus of the Munster Technological University. Work to recruit 250 additional management executives, support-function staff and front-line access-to-care staff is continuing as part of its ongoing expansion plans. RelateCare serves as an extension to healthcare organisations by providing administrative support and clinical advice through a variety of technologically-advanced platforms. The Tralee site will support several blue-chip US healthcare clients, with administrative and clinical support services covering access to care activities and post discharge management. The hub is also in the process of building teams to support Irish clients, and RelateCare will leverage its proximity to the Corca Dhuibhne Gaeltacht to expand its Irish-speaking employee base. Part of the Akusus Group, which includes Rigneydolphin, the company also recently appointed healthcare and life-sciences expert Liz Shanahan as its chairwoman. RelateCare Group chief executive Conor O’Byrne said: “The global pandemic has changed the way that organisations communicate with patients and increased the need for virtual engagement. “In a time of unprecedented demand for healthcare services we are incredibly proud to create these new opportunities as part of our ongoing growth and increasingly pivotal role in supporting so many healthcare organisations, at home in Ireland and abroad. “Throughout the pandemic, we have gained important experience in providing our employees with working models that span geographies and allow flexible work from home solutions. “We plan to operate these models at our second Irish physical location at the Innovation Centre on the Munster Technological University campus with a mixture of both onsite and remote working. Our footprint will continue to expand in the region over the coming years.” The group currently employs over 1,400 people with 1,100 employees in Ireland and more than 300 across the United States. Its headquarters are in Waterford City, with US hubs in Cleveland, Ohio and most recently Little Rock, Arkansas. The company’s continued growth in 2022 follows on from significant revenue and employee growth in 2021 with more than 500 employees added. Leo Clancy, Enterprise Ireland chief executive, said RelateCare was “an excellent Irish company making a positive impact globally, delivering innovative healthcare solutions that improve patient journeys”. “Established only eight years ago, the company has become a significant employer in Waterford and the opening of its new facility in Tralee is very positive news for the town and the south-west region,” he said. “Enterprise Ireland has worked closely with the company since it was established, and we are proud to support RelateCare with its ambitious expansion plans announced today which will create 280 high value new jobs in Tralee.”