One of the country’s best known commentators on the housing crisis, Karl Deeter, has declared “yes in my backyard” to plans for a €140 million 368-unit residential scheme for Malahide in north Dublin. Currently, a subsidiary of Hollybrook New Homes, Kinwest Ltd has strategic housing development (SHD) plans before An Bord Pleanála for 239 apartments, 87 houses and 42 duplex units on lands at Auburn House. The two- to five-storey scheme off the R107 Malahide Road/Dublin Road is a scaled-down version of a 411-unit scheme that was previously refused by An Bord Pleanála last July. A regular on TV and radio talkshows and local resident, Mr Deeter has written to An Bord Pleanála, saying: “House prices are already crazy and rose 15 per cent in the past year – rents are also crazy and rose in near double digits. We won’t solve this national dilemma through the delay and prevention of housing. With an address of Halsted, Streamstown, Malahide, the former mortgage broker says: “For that reason I am saying ‘yes in my backyard’ to this development which will effectively envelope my home”. Mr Deeter’s comments come against the background of residents stalling a large number of An Bord Pleanála-approved SHD schemes around the capital in the High Court. Mr Deeter said on Friday that the context for his submission is “we have a housing crisis. We have lands zoned for housing. I don’t know how we are going to resolve a housing crisis if we don’t have viable projects.” He said: “I care about my future neighbours and I want my children to be able to buy a home one day. What hope do they have if there are no houses there. If there was a food crisis we wouldn’t be saying ‘don’t plant any crops’. “We have a moral imperative to embrace the fact that we need to build houses. It is logically inconsistent to say you care about the housing crisis and still object.” However, Mr Deeter’s support for the SHD scheme is at odds with the stance taken by other locals. In an objection on behalf of all residents of Streamstown Wood, local resident, Philip Tyrell states: “Our objection is based on a large number of points which include unsuitable roads, lack of suitable facilities within walking distance, minimal public transport, effect on existing amenity, contravening of previously, existing and proposed development plans and lack of schools in the locality.” On behalf of Streamstown Wood Owners’ Management Company, Mr Tyrell contends that “the need for housing in the country at this time does not in itself warrant the placing of large, high density and multistorey developments on any and all available lands.” In a separate objection, Erika and Albert Reynolds of Clairville Lodge, Malahide state that they “are very concerned that the development will have a severe and detrimental impact on the neighbourhood as well as the enjoyment of our family home”. The Reynolds said: “You will be turning a quiet neighbourhood into an urban one with the addition of apartment buildings as well as the increased population that goes with them. Malahide is a coastal town not an urban one.” The Clairville Lodge Residents’ Group and the Malahide Community Forum have also lodged objections. A decision is due on the application in August.