Once again desperate African migrants are paying a heavy toll with their lives for attempts to break into Fortress Europe. More than 500 have drowned so far this year in Mediterranean Sea crossings. Last Friday at least 23 more died, and possibly up to 37,  when in excess of 2,000 migrants attempted to overwhelm border fences between Morocco and the Spanish north African enclave of Melilla. Reports suggest most appear to have been crushed in a stampede, fallen from high barbed-wire fences, or have died in clashes with border guards who responded with batons, stones and teargas to the onslaught. [ Migrants die trying to cross into Spanish territory ] The deaths mark the most serious incident at Melilla, which together with Ceuta, another Spanish enclave on the coast of Morocco, have attracted thousands of African migrants trying to enter Europe over the past decade. More than 500 had managed to slip into a border control area after cutting an opening with shears and some 133 people eventually made it across the border. Spain says 49 Guardia Civil officers sustained mild injuries, while Morocco reports 140 of its security forces were injured, five seriously. Human rights and refugee groups have rightly demanded an inquiry over concerns that the authorities used excessive force, insisting also that forcible ejections are prohibited under international law because they prevent possible refugees from making requests for international protection. Amnesty International’s Esteban Beltrán claims most of the migrants trying to enter the Spanish enclave were fleeing conflict in South Sudan and should be treated like war refugees. The attempt to enter Melilla was the first since Spain repaired severely frayed diplomatic relations with Morocco by announcing last month that it now supports Rabat’s plan to offer autonomy under Moroccan sovereignty to former Spanish colony Western Sahara. It had been annexed by Morocco in 1976 and the latter had previously on occasions turned a blind eye to attempts to break in to the enclave. The price of the new spirit of co-operation will be paid by migrants.