The Government cannot respond every month with a different set of measures to address rising inflation, Minister for Public Expenditure Michael McGrath has said. The autumn would be the time to introduce additional social welfare measures, he told RTÉ Radio’s Morning Ireland. That would be when heating and energy bills would start to rise and people would need the most help. A multibillion-euro package of supports for families and workers is being prepared by the Government which will see childcare fees cut significantly and welfare rates increased beyond the levels that were agreed last year. Senior Government sources said the changes, unlikely to be announced until budget day in October, could be introduced before the end of the year in response to the cost-of-living crisis, rather than early next year. The prospect of a “mini-budget” or the introduction of emergency welfare increases before October appeared to be receding on Monday, with Taoiseach Micheál Martin saying it was unlikely that there would be additional measures to alleviate inflationary pressures before the budget. [ Multibillion-euro package of supports to include significant cuts in childcare outlay ] Mr McGrath said in the meantime there would be additional supports available through the Department of Social Protection in the form of the exceptional needs payment which could assist with energy, food, clothing and day-to-day necessities. People should not be faced with “awful choices” such as whether to spend money on food or clothing. “If people genuinely need support to get by, please do reach out”, he said. The Government had to ensure it would have sufficient resources available in the autumn, every option would have to be carefully considered, he said. The more resources there were available, the greater the options and flexibility. Mr McGrath said the Government’s focus was on preparing for the budget, and the first step was the summer economic statement which was to clarify what funding was left to spend for the remainder of the year. Every effort would be made to protect people’s living standards, but it was not possible for the Government to offset every increase. “As a Government, we need to get the balance right,” he said. When asked if a double social welfare payment would be made as had been suggested by a number of agencies, Mr McGrath said it would be given careful consideration. He acknowledged there would need to be an increase in the core social welfare rates, but again, the issue was “getting the balance right” including changes to the taxation system and addressing day-to-day costs to healthcare, childcare, rent etc. Sources in the Department of Children said increased subsidies for childcare would be “significant” and would represent a key plank of October’s budget. The three Government party leaders met on Monday night to discuss the cost-of-living crisis and they were given a presentation by Minister for Finance Paschal Donohoe and Mr McGrath in advance of the publication of the Government’s summer economic statement. Sources said the budgetary package for next year would far exceed what was provided last year, especially given the challenges posed by housing Ukrainian refugees and addressing high inflation. The social welfare package in Budget 2022 saw 1.4 million people receive a €5-per-week increase in payments and sources say this year’s package could see higher increases. Tánaiste Leo Varadkar said increases in the State pension and other social welfare payments would have to be greater next year than they were this year. He said the Government had already brought in €2.4 billion in measures to help with the cost of living and it had “nothing planned” before October’s budget. However, he said some measures in the budget-day package “could come into effect almost immediately” while others would take effect next year. He said a lot of the weekly rates for social welfare payments could be increased by ministerial order and did not require legislation to go through the Dáil. On the issue of the stalled public sector pay talks, Mr McGrath said the Government offer amounted to seven per cent over two years while the inflation rate was nine per cent. “That’s three-quarters of the way.” But pay alone was not enough to address inflation, he said. The Government thought its offer was fair and good for low-paid workers, he said. Mr McGrath said he hoped that discussions could be resumed as a collective agreement was “best for everyone”. The negotiations with public service unions stalled when a Government offer of a 5 per cent pay increase over two years was rejected. Sources on both sides said they were awaiting an approach from the Workplace Relations Commission, but a spokesman for the Department of Enterprise said the role of the commission was to assist the parties at their request.