Social media has been aflame since The Handshake, Part 2. As mid-championship storylines go, it has it all: two A-Listers, forever linked in the public consciousness for their achievements together, now in opposition and seemingly embroiled in a cold war. Their former team-mate, Jackie Tyrell, however, curiously misjudged the zeitgeist during the live coverage on RTÉ television. “And there’s a lovely touch, just to see two lads that soldiered together for so many years,” Jackie, began, before anchor Joanne Cantwell cut him off. “I have to say, it didn’t look all that lovely, Jackie,” she pointed out, which was quite measured given the obviousness frostiness on show. “Ah look, it’s nice to see themselves embracing each other,” Tyrell countered. “That’s not an embrace, that’s a very, very brief touch of hands.” “Yeah, well look, it’s better than nothing, Joanne. I think at the end of the day, it’s a game, we all love it and we all go and try represent ourselves as best as possible.” Did Roscommon fear New York on home soil? New York’s Tailteann Cup match against Offaly in Tullamore was their first championship game on Irish soil since 2001. Back then, they lost to Roscommon at Dr Hyde Park. The build-up to that game had been particularly rancorous. The Connacht Council promised New York they could play their next five championship matches in Gaelic Park but left the venue for 2001 up to the Rossies – and they weren’t budging. “First they worried about the cost of the journey so we offered to pay their expenses,” said New York president Monty Moloney. “Then they were worried about their players’ safety, so we said we’d surround the pitch with barbed wire if they so wanted. “I came to the conclusion that they’re afraid they’d lose to us if they played us here.” No surprises from Tyrone Tyrone’s post-All-Ireland hangover was a particularly heavy one this time but there is nothing new there. The county has made six All-Ireland finals and have tended to flop the following season. Their maiden final appearance was in 1986; in ‘87, Armagh hammered them in Ulster. After losing the ‘95 final, they retained Ulster but lost by nine against Meath. In 2004, months after winning Sam for the first time, Derry beat them by 11 points in the first round of Ulster. Derry again won, by six, in 2006, after which they exited the championship at the hands of Laois on July 8th. In 2009, they bucked the trend, lifting the Anglo-Celt Cup before exiting by four against Cork in the All-Ireland semi-final. Kerry suffer further Joe McDonagh Cup heartache Spare a thought for Kerry hurlers who have now lost the Joe McDonagh Cup final for three years in succession. On Saturday, the Kingdom lost a goal fest against Antrim by a point (5-22 to 4-26). Last year, Westmeath beat them by seven points and the year before, Antrim won by two. Since the tiered championships were introduced in 2005, Armagh (2015-17, Nicky Rackard Cup) are the only other side to lose three deciders on the bounce. Word of Mouth “Surely consideration should have been given to have the Leinster final played in tullamore or Portlaoise create an atmosphere. Croke park was soulless & empty yesterday.” – Former Kilkenny star Eddie Brennan (@NedzerB13) By the Numbers - 3 Leinster titles in a row for Kilkenny hurlers.