Moving swiftly onwards, Ireland’s Nations League campaign arrives in Lodz, Poland with an immediate opportunity to redress last Wednesday’s 1-0 defeat to Ukraine. Only problem is that version of Ukraine, full of undercooked domestic players, will be transformed by Oleksandr Petrakov’s recalling European based stars like Benefica’s Roman Yaremchuk. As Ireland beat Scotland 3-0 on Saturday evening, thanks to Michael Obafemi and Troy Parrott combining for coldly executed goals, Ukraine were settling into their home from home with the same return against Armenia at the Miejski stadium. [ Michael Obafemi’s screamer caps memorable first Nations League win for Ireland ] “The atmosphere was just wonderful,” said Petrakov in the Polish city, 350 kilometres from his war torn country, “we seemed to be playing in Ukraine.” The sight of a young girl singing the national anthem - ‘Shche ne vmerla Ukrainy’ (‘Ukraine Has Not Yet Perished’) - in front of 12,000 supporters, many of them refugees, provides a stark warning of what awaits a flagging Irish squad come Tuesday evening. Shane Duffy’s suspension and John Egan’s dodgy ankle are set take three captains out of the equation, as they join Séamus Coleman, Matt Doherty and Andrew Omobamidele on a growing list of injured defenders. Kenny also indicated that Josh Cullen needs a rest, having played 270 minutes in seven days, and Obafemi’s groin problem was serious enough to remove him following a sensational first international goal and sumptuous assist for Parrott. “Me and Troy have a good understanding of each other,” said Obafemi. “I saw his run and put it right on a plate for him.” The arrival, in unison, of Parrott and Obafemi, aged just 20 and 21, lessens the stress on a squad limping towards summer holidays. It also begs the question about when these tyros will enter their prime? Tuesday in Lodz is too soon but perhaps the 2024 Euros or maybe collective patience is required until the 2026 World Cup in North America? And what will primetime look like? “Right, that’s a big question,” said Kenny, presumably laughing at the fickle line between winning and losing. “I don’t want to make too big a statement either . . . but I have always been excited about this team. Not because we won 3-0 here and not because we lost 1-0 last week. [ Ireland 3 Scotland 0: How Stephen Kenny’s side rated ] “After Belgium 2-all here [in March] people thought we were absolutely brilliant and then we win 1-0 [against Lithuania] and the next game we lose [to Armenia] and it is a catastrophe. “That seems to be the [media] business and I understand that. But I am very clear about what we are doing and what we want to do. Very, very clear. I think we are definitely emerging to be a very exciting team. I definitely do feel that.” Kenny will not be hounded out of his ultimate job by stubborn refusal to re-imagine style or formation. Reverting to a strike partnership and three midfielders for Scotland, he revealed that this was the tactical plan all along. “Well, we did change our system. We obviously played 3-5-2 as opposed to 3-4-2-1 so there was a tactical change. Not everything was perfect. We have had better passages of play in other games and not scored. “It was a tactical decision that we felt was right for this match. Michael and Troy came in. Obviously we didn’t score in the last two games so we needed to score and make sure we carried a real attacking threat all the time. “We practiced playing like that for the first five days of this camp because it is new for us and we know the 3-4-2-1 very well. Goals make such a difference.” Goals by natural centre forwards, Obafemi and Parrott, who had previously struggled to make the line-up or found themselves picked out of position, overwhelmed Scotland. Kenny also denied Steve Clarke’s team the run of midfield by placing Jason Knight and Jayson Molumby in front of Cullen. “I know what I am doing,” he said, reminding those who lost faith following defeats to Armenia and Ukraine. “We were on a great run and we had setbacks this week which really hurt us. “There is a really radical shift in terms of the players we have brought through. It is really exciting for the public to identify with them and to identify with an exciting style of play. The Irish support really believe in this team, I feel. They know we are not perfect. They know we have imperfections. “This was the most significant home victory in a competitive game since Bosnia in 2015, so the players can enjoy it with their family.” A brief pause before Ukraine’s emotional avalanche further examines the radicalisation of Irish football.