Ryan Fox, the Horizon Irish Open tournament leader after round one, has a wager with Shane Lowry on the outcome of New Zealand’s rugby match against Ireland at Eden Park on Saturday (8.05am). Lowry managed to negotiate a 10-point handicap in Ireland’s favour for the first of three Tests against the All Blacks. Fox, a son of current New Zealand selector and 1987 World Cup-winning outhalf Grant, has managed to give Lowry one point less than the bookmakers are offering (+11) in terms of the handicap bet. New Zealand are unbeaten at Eden Park in 46 Tests dating back to 1994 when they lost to France. They have drawn just one match since then, the third Test against the British & Irish Lions in 2017. Fox said: “The first Test of the year is always a big one, generally we’re a little bit rusty, but also I feel a little bit of excitement.” Fox confirmed that his dad steps down as an All Black selector after this series to be replaced by Joe Schmidt. However, the former Ireland coach has been involved is prepping the All Blacks this week after head coach Ian Foster came down with Covid-19. The newly crowned US Senior Open champion Pádraig Harrington was a little miffed at a lacklustre finish to his round with bogeys on 16 and 18 partially assuaged by a birdie on the 17th. He admitted: “I was kind of thinking when I got to three-under par if I could get it to four would be a really good day. [I’m] disappointed to drop the shots at the end. You know, I knew there would be tough patches in this week no matter what. “I kept myself in the game enough, and the crowds were certainly there helping me. So, yeah, I was okay today I would have said. I think the key is not to, two under is okay, but if you’re any worse, you would be very flat going in [to Friday]. At least at two under I still have an opportunity to go forward. There are plenty guys who went low, and hopefully I can be one of those guys tomorrow. The number of minutes between Mark Power’s opening tee shot and his second shot to the par-five 10th. The Kilkenny native waited for the green to clear, landed on the front apron and then chipped and putted for birdie. “Missing out on one of my favourite golf tournaments due to illness. The Irish golf fans are amazing and it’s special to see how they treat their heroes.” – Former European Ryder Cup winning captain and Irish Open winner (2006, Carton House) Thomas Bjorn was a late withdrawal from the tournament due to a stomach issue.