Top earning public servants will see their pay restored by up to 15 per cent from next week in a move which is likely to spark political and public backlash amid the cost-of-living crisis. Pay restoration is the last phase of the unwinding of pay cuts imposed on public servants during the financial crisis. It is understood to involve pay rises of 10-15 per cent for judges, hospital consultants and many senior officials from July 1st. The restoration date has been set for July 1st in legislation. Any change to this would require emergency legislation to be passed through the Oireachtas before that date. The Cabinet did not approve any legislation on Tuesday and none is planned for this week. It is understood that no legislation will be brought forward next week, meaning that restoration must proceed from next Friday week. The move affects some 4,000 public servants earning in excess of €150,000. Restoration has already taken place for all other public servants. Previously, Ministers had intended to postpone the pay rises. But legal advice suggests that such a move would be open to challenge and it is understood that Ministers and senior officials expected that such a challenge would be inevitable. Doctors’ organisations have previously warned the Government not to cancel or postpone the pay increases. In addition, it is understood that hospital consultants have warned the Government that they would not proceed with talks on a new contract if their pay was not restored. Stalled talks on a new contract — considered essential if more consultants are to be recruited to the health service — are due to restart in the coming days. In a statement, the Department of Public Expenditure said its Minister, Michael McGrath, expected to make a decision later this week or early next week. But political sources say the restoration must now proceed and expect a fierce political backlash. It comes as the Government continues to resist calls from the Opposition to introduce an emergency budget before the autumn to help struggling households amid record inflation levels. In the Dáil, Sinn Féin again called on the Coalition to introduce immediate measures to tackle the cost of living, but Taoiseach Micheál Martin said the Government will intervene at budget time to “get people through what will be a difficult winter period across the board”. Tánaiste Leo Varadkar promised a record Budget 2023 package which will include an increase in the bonus a worker can be given tax-free, from €500 to €1,000. However, he also said “the only plan we have at the moment is for a major intervention to help people with the cost of living and that will happen in the autumn, on budget day”. He confirmed the Government is looking at changes that could be implemented immediately once they are announced. Mr Varadkar said welfare and pension increases will have to be larger than last year to keep up with the cost of living. A tax package, with a “big increase” in the standard rate cut-off point, is seen as the most likely way to deliver a break to the squeezed middle in the budget, said Coalition insiders on Tuesday. “The good news is, and this probably won’t be a surprise to anyone, that we have more room to manoeuvre for the budget this autumn than we would have had in any year in recent years. That is driven by the fact that tax receipts are very healthy, there are record levels of employment, the fact that incomes are rising, and trade figures are better than ever. The public finances are in a good state. “But that has to be offset against the fact that the budget is happening in the context of inflation. So, pension and welfare increases will have to be bigger than they were in previous years because the cost of living is rising faster than in previous years. Because we have made an agreement as a Government to index tax bands and credits, the tax package will be bigger than it was in previous years for that reason.” While the Government has said it plans to wait until the budget until the next intervention, some senior sources still believe there could be a “change of heart” and Government may be forced to move sooner, or even move the budget to earlier in the year. This is not a view shared across the Government, with other sources noting the importance of September’s tax returns for the budget process.