One thing that has emerged from the LIV Tour threat to the PGA Tour has been that it has seemingly lit the fire of Rory McIlroy, who leads the Travelers after a superb opening round of 62 at TPC River Highlands on the PGA Tour. McIlroy won two weeks ago in Canada and finished tied 5th in the US Open. “It’s nice, it’s like the anti-US Open here. It’s like US Open rehab. You’re like, ‘oh, I can actually make some birdies’. This is nice,” the world number two said after the round, where Séamus Power is tied 15th after a 67. In the LPGA Championship, one of the five women’s Majors, Stephanie Meadow is nine shots and Leona Maguire is 10 shots behind leader In Gee Chun after the South Korea shot an outstanding 64 to lead by five shots at Congressional. People take freetakers for granted, writes Joe Canning in today’s Subscriber Only piece, as Cork and Clare both had freetakers who had off days in last weekend’s quarter-final. Luckily for Clare, they got away with their wastefulness in front of goal from dead balls. Speaking of his own experience, Canning writes: “I loved taking frees. I enjoyed the challenge and I wanted the pressure. I knew that if they went wrong on me, I would get stick for it. I was okay with that. These games matter to people. If it’s your job to score the frees, you should feel like you’ve let people down if you don’t get them.” Attention turns to Gaelic football this weekend and Dublin’s Niall Scully shows their squad credentials despite bench-warming duty, as holding such an experienced player in reserve means stronger substitute options. In ladies football Cork are still on course for glory, says Ciara O’Sullivan, despite AFLW defections, as talented teenager Erika O’Shea is tempted away by the Melbourne Demons. Elsewhere, publicly gay since 2011, referee David Gough has said of how his self-confidence and general happiness has mushroomed as a result of the GAA’s full embrace. Gough tells the story by way of encouragement for any young player or athlete who is thinking, and procrastinating, about coming out and being their full authentic selves in public. In advance of pride weekend, Leinster scrumhalf Nick McCarthy has come out as gay, as Johnny Watterson writes that the courageous first steps have shown the world is not changing fast enough. “Why anyone’s sexuality should be open to judgment is the other side to the human condition, although a professional rugby player coming out in the cold house of sport throws light into other places. Many are less inclusive, more viscerally hostile in their views than metropolitan Dublin.”   Devin Toner has exited the stage with Leinster with no regrets, saying he is “happy to be known as the lineout expert” as the province’s record appearance holder departs with a chest full of medals, even if not departing with one. “I was never going to be the one making breaks or scoring tries, I did the dirty work and the stuff you don’t see. I’d be happy enough if my team-mates knew I did everything I could.” In soccer, Vera Pauw’s women face into another fixture of significant magnitude as win in Monday’s away clash with Georgia vital if Ireland are to progress, writes Lisa Fallon. “This is a straightforward task. Get in, get the win and get out with a clean bill of health.” In League of Ireland, Rovers and Bohs are likely to deliver in a tight Dublin derby. A full house of 7,500 and live television for a spicy derby that Bohemians really need to win to maintain their relevance in the title shake-up.