It is testament to a house when its owners stay well beyond their intended timeframe. For Mount Brandon, a lovely rambling Georgian pile perched on an elevated position overlooking the River Barrow, its owners initially had different intentions: “We make a change every decade — but we’ve been here 18 years — as it’s just that type of place that we didn’t want to leave”. They are now selling up to make time for more travelling after almost two decades in their home on large parklands in the Kilkenny village of Graiguenamanagh. Percy and Mildred, a peacock and peahen share the 17-acre estate with the owners, and they too appear to love the spot as much as the human residents. Despite never having their wings clipped — so they were always at liberty to leave — they too have chosen to stay in the peaceful spot overlooking the River Barrow. The impressive house was built by John Kelly & Son; Georgian inventors and engineers who established The Barrow Starch Works and Patent Steam Mills in 1842. A farsighted family, it was, at the time the only one of its kind in Ireland, and their expertise and attention to detail is evident in the craftsmanship that has gone into MounBrandon itself. The Kelly family are immortalised in a stained-glass window depicting the family crest, and motto: “Turris Fortis Mihi Deus” (God is my tower of strength), at the end of the spacious entrance hallway. After the Kelly family, the six-bedroom house was leased by James Hamilton Fitzgerald Nixon, a relative of the 37th president of the United States, Richard Nixon. Though when Nixon arrived in Ireland in 1970 his relatives had moved — so he stayed at Kilfrush Stud in Co Limerick — another impressive pile which sold in 2019, when it was seeking €5.5m. What is most interesting, given the current price of energy, is the house was once powered by a turbine off the river Barrow, as were the starch works and much of the town itself, thanks to another set of residents, the Murphy engineering family. Interiors are a combination of elegance mixed with a sense of country charm that Georgian homes exude. Within its perfect symmetry and proportions — and despite the formality of reception rooms, including dining, drawing and living rooms — it’s all a very relaxed affair. Of interest, and where the current owners have entertained quite a bit, is the (156sq m/1,679sq ft) sun-trapped courtyard that lies off the dual aspect kitchen. Across this courtyard is a lovely coach house that has undergone a recent renovation. It now has a one-bedroom self-contained apartment on the upper floor with storage and a garage beneath. Described as a “walkers paradise” by the owner as there is a 1km private woodland trail on the grounds, there is an abundance of local trails in the lands surrounding the estate. Accessed via a sweeping driveway, gardens are landscaped with mature plantings and lawns that flank each side of meandering pathways. The family swim in the river most days and have created an organic orchard with autumnal bounties of apples, pears and plums. It feels like it’s miles from everywhere as woodland and parkland give a private setting, yet the property is within walking distance to the pretty village of Graiguenamanagh. Though new owners will buy the estate for its tranquil and private setting over the river, there is development potential on some of the parkland which is zoned for low-density residential development. The magical spot is now on the market through joint agents Sherry FitzGerald Country Homes and Sherry FitzGerald Peter McCreery seeking €1.6m.