Mayo 2-13 Kildare 0-14 Sometimes even a slow-bicycle race is hard to look away from. In the end, Kildare and Mayo both turned in bad enough performances to make this a compelling evening. It ended the faintly tragicomic sight of Kildare goalkeeper Aaron O’Neill back-pedalling to watch a Jordan Flynn shot that may or may not have been an attempt at a point sail over his head into the net. Mayo out the gap with a five-point win. How? Well, part of it was that their pillars held them up when they had to. Lee Keegan was terrific again, Oisín Mullin shook off a sketchy defensive display to bomb forward for the killer goal, Eoghan McLaughlin kept them breathing when they couldn’t buy a score early on. But partly too it was that Kildare were unable to finish them off when they were aching to be put out of their misery. Man oh man, it was gruelling stuff. On Mayo’s last championship visit to Croke Park, they kicked away the All-Ireland final and watched their chance of lifting Sam Maguire go up in the smoke of hurried attempts and wayward drives. This was like that, minus the gum-bleeding tension of the game’s biggest day. In the first half here, Mayo had 16 shots on goal and scored with five of them. Six of their attempts didn’t even reach the goals. Maybe most damning of all, Kildare only had to take half their chances to build up a commanding lead. Glenn Ryan’s side led by 0-8 to 0-5 at the break, without being in any way sparkling themselves. The five-goal tonking they took from Dublin in the Leinster final got its answer here – Kildare lined up with a double sweeper and didn’t budge from it, even when they went behind late on. For ages, it had worked a treat. Sufficient on to the day was the bus-parking thereof. Mayo weren’t able to work good shooting positions so they tried their luck from tricky ones and forced them when they weren’t really on. Hence the paltry return. The Kildare midfield were well on top, with Kevin Feely and Kevin O’Callaghan both spearing points. Jimmy Hyland ticked along with his frees and Darragh Malone landed a long one. But they missed their share of chances too – Ben McCormack’s radar was off, Daniel Flynn hit the post with a close-in mark. None of it seemed like it would matter though, as Kildare pushed on to a six-point lead early in the second half. McCormack, Flynn and Hyland all swished lovely scores, pushing the score to 0-11 to 0-5 up. That was the time to kill Mayo off but they followed up with bad misses from McCormack and Paul Cribbin. Mayo have been down this road before, of course. Keegan came forward and pinged a salvation effort, substitute Fergal Boland made a claim for himself with a couple of long-range efforts. Diarmuid O’Connor put a sheen on a generally wan display with an outrageous score from distance and all of a sudden, Mayo were hanging in there. Still and all, Kildare were 0-13 to 0-10 ahead on the hour mark. They were sitting in, packing their defence, holding everyone inside their own 45 to try to see it out. Yet in the end, all it took to break them down was a one-two between the Mayo full back and corner back, ending with Mullin bearing down on goal and roofing his shot. From the point on, Mayo always had the upper hand. Cillian O’Connor had a generally dispiriting day but was still able to steal in for the go-ahead score on 68 minutes. Darren McHale came off the bench to land a monster one on the stroke of 70. And when Kildare goalkeeper O’Neill got caught upfield as Kildare chased a goal, it fell to Flynn to finish the whole thing off. Mayo into the quarter-final, then. Produce this again and that’s where the season will end. KILDARE: Aaron O’Neill; Mick O’Grady, Shea Ryan (0-1), Ryan Houlihan; Darragh Malone (0-1), David Hyland, Kevin Flynn; Kevin Feely (0-1), Kevin O’Callaghan (0-2); Alex Beirne, Ben McCormack (0-1), Fergal Conway; Neil Flynn (0-1), Daniel Flynn (0-1), Jimmy Hyland (0-6, five frees). Subs: Paul Cribbin for Beirne (32 mins), Darragh Kirwan for N Flynn (55), Paddy McDermott for Conway (72), Brian McLoughlin for Hyland (72). MAYO: Rob Hennelly; Lee Keegan (0-2), Oisín Mullin (1-0), Enda Hession; Paddy Durcan, Stephen Coen, Eoghan McLaughlin (0-2); Aidan O’Shea, Mattie Ruane; Diarmuid O’Connor (0-1), Jason Doherty, Conor Loftus (0-1); James Carr, Jack Carney (0-1), Cillian O’Connor (0-3, one free). Subs: Fergal Boland (0-2) for Doherty (28 mins), Darren McHale (0-1) for Carr (44), Pádraig O’Hora for Coen (46), Jordan Flynn (1-0) for O’Shea (61), Aiden Orme for Carney (72). Referee: Derek O’Mahony (Tipperary).