Preparations for a Border poll are “premature, hasty and divisive” the Fine Gael TD and former minister for justice and foreign affairs Charlie Flanagan has said, adding that there was “little evidence” that a poll in the North would produce a majority for reunification and even doubt that a vote would pass in the Republic. But the Sinn Féin first minister designate Michelle O’Neill again called on the Government in Dublin to make preparations for a Border poll and for the reunification of the island. Mr Flanagan also criticised Sinn Féin for raising “political fears by the constant beating of the united Ireland drum”. He said “meetings and gatherings across the island preparing for a united Ireland without unionism are without realism”. He was speaking at a Fine Gael event commemorating the life of former taoiseach John A Costello in Dublin on Sunday. “There is little evidence that the people of Northern Ireland would vote for a united Ireland,” he said. “In fact, there is doubt if even the majority of people in the Republic would vote for a united Ireland, at this time. If the protocol remains in place, Northern Ireland will continue to have the best of both worlds. Economic indicators are showing that Northern Ireland is already benefiting from this unique position. Why would people vote to change that situation?” Mr Flanagan, who served as minister for justice, 2017-20 and as minister for foreign affairs, 2014-17 and is currently the chairman of the Oireachtas foreign affairs committee, was also critical of the British government for its approach to Northern Ireland. “The trust between the two governments that was so carefully developed during the last 50 years has now been fractured by this Conservative government,” he said. “Trust has also broken down between the UK and the EU. This UK government is no longer seen by the EU as a good-faith partner. We can only hope that other voices within the Conservative Party will take a more principled stand.” But speaking at her party’s Wolfe Tone commemoration, Ms O’Neill, the Sinn Féin leader in Northern Ireland, again called on the Government to prepare for a unity referendum. “We need re-entry back into the EU for all of Ireland,” she said. “We need an Irish national health service, free at the point of entry. We need to tackle the climate crisis on our island. We need to end the duplication of public services. We need to maximise the full economic potential and opportunities for everyone who shares this island,” she told the party event in Bodenstown, Co Kildare. Earlier on Sunday, Taoiseach Micheál Martin said UK government legislation to scrap the bulk of the protocol represented “economic vandalism” on Northern Ireland. “The unilateral decision of the British government to bring in legislation to undermine or to give the power to undermine almost all aspects of the protocol is not acceptable,” Mr Martin told BBC’s Sunday Morning programme. “It represents unilateralism of the worst kind in terms of honouring and adhering to international agreements that governments adhere to and sign up to and ratify in their parliaments. “We accept fully there are legitimate issues around the operation of the protocol and we believe with serious, sustained negotiations between the European Union and United Kingdom government those issues could be resolved.” He said the legislation is “deeply concerning” industry and businesses in Northern Ireland.