Dublin City Council has approved plans for a big development on Moore Street and Moore Lane in inner-city Dublin despite significant levels of political opposition. The plan, which was submitted by British commercial property giant Hammerson, will involve the demolition of all existing buildings and structures on site to accommodate the construction of a new public plaza. Hammerson welcomed the decision on Tuesday, describing the plan, dubbed the “Dublin Central Project”, as a “landmark development” for the city. It follows two other approvals earlier this year by Dublin City Council relating to other parts of the same scheme. The initial two permissions involve land to the west of the site, including residential, hotel, workspace, shopping, dining and cultural uses as well as new street connections and a “substantial public square”. The latest permission relates to land between Moore Lane and Moore Street, and will include offices, cafes and restaurants at ground floor. Hammerson said it would be submitting a number of further applications for the remainder of the site. “Hammerson’s proposals for the regeneration of this important 5.5-acre site in Dublin’s north inner city represents an opportunity to appropriately regenerate this historic part of Dublin, while ensuring its long-standing traditions and important heritage can be retained and celebrated,” the company said. The plan drew more than 50 objections, many of which came local businesses and political figures including MEPs for Dublin Ciaran Cuffe and Clare Daly, as well as a number of Sinn Féin politicians, including leader Mary Lou McDonald, Pearse Doherty and former president Gerry Adams. “These applications are contrary to the decision by Dublin City Council which unanimously voted to list 10-25 Moore Street as protected structures,” said Mr Adams in his objection. “This site covers the Moore Street battlefield site, which the National Museum of Ireland has described as ‘the most important historic site in modern Irish history.’” The overall Dublin Central master plan area, with almost 200m of continuous frontage on O’Connell Street Upper, bounded by Parnell Street to the north, Moore Street to the west and Henry Street to the south, includes proposals for 94 new homes. They also include 8,000sq m of restaurants, cafes and shops; 44,000sq m of flexible workspace; up to 210 hotel rooms; and a new public gallery and cafe. Hammerson said it would support 8,600 job opportunities on site and in terms of supply chain.