Friday (7.45pm unless stated) Bohemians v Derry City, Dalymount Park Eight draws. If Bohs had flipped half of them into wins, Keith Long’s latest rebuild would have them in the conversation to finish second behind Shamrock Rovers. Promise Omochere has been unplayable at times this season so Derry must slam shut Dawson Devoy’s supply-chain to the rangy winger and hope that Will Patching continues to pour in the goals from midfield. [ League of Ireland table, results, fixtures ] Dundalk v UCD, Oriel Park In Liam Kerrigan and Colm Whelan, the students had Irish Under-21 forwards that were capable of tearing up any defence in the Premier Division. Whelan’s season-ending injury and Kerrigan joining the growing list of Irish talent at Italian clubs gives Dundalk no excuses, even with Patrick Hoban injured, to cut into Rovers’ 10-point lead at the top. St Patrick’s Athletic v Drogheda United, Richmond Park Drogheda lie in no man’s land. All but certain to avoid relegation without ever getting close to mid-table, their abysmal away form invites Eoin Doyle to bring his goal tally for St Pat’s to nine. Scoring has not been a problem for Tim Clancy’s side, it’s the 21 goals they have conceded in 22 games, with Rovers carving them up far too easily last Monday night. Finn Harps v Shamrock Rovers, Finn Park, 8pm Rovers manager Stephen Bradley repeatedly states that winning the league is more important than progress to the European group stages but a third successive title loses its sheen if this well-stocked squad cannot turn summer soccer into hard-nosed winter football. Jack Byrne remains injured but expect plenty of rotation in advance of Hibernians of Malta coming to Tallaght on Tuesday. Saturday Sligo Rovers v Shelbourne, 7.45pm This is a serious fixture for two clubs separated by four points, with Damien Duff’s charges holding a game in hand, as a hot summer run could sneak one of them into the European conversation. Highly unlikely, yet possible if Shels manage to strengthen their panel in the coming weeks.