Tributes have been paid to former UTV journalist Aideen Kennedy (43), who has died following a terminal illness. On Friday, Ms Kennedy posted on social media  to inform followers that she was receiving palliative care. She asked all those who knew her to keep an eye out for her children, Jacob and Eva, whom she called “the kindest, sweetest most thoughtful kiddies”. A spokesperson for UTV said the organisation was “deeply saddened” to hear of the death of the former colleague and friend. “A truly gifted reporter, she spent many years at UTV bringing viewers stories from all over Northern Ireland. We wish to extend our heartfelt sympathies to her family at this very sad time.” Belfast Telegraph political editor Suzanne Breen was among those who remembered Ms Kennedy on social media, saying the TV presenter “lit up every room she was in”. “I did the same journalism course as her sister Fiona. Aideen’s mum taught me at primary school. She’s now lost all four children. What tragedy to befall one family. It puts everything into perspective.” Alliance councillor Sian Mulholland posted: “My heart absolutely breaks for Aideen’s parents, who have now had to say goodbye to their four children. Life can be so exceptionally cruel.” DUP MLA Emma Little-Pengelly said she was “absolutely devastated” over the death of her “beautiful, funny, kind friend”. “I will miss her terribly. We met 22 years ago when we shared a room for the summer in DC and became firm friends. Goodbye beautiful girl.” In an interview with the Belfast Telegraph in 2019, Ms Kennedy described how she grew up in Belfast with parents Maura and Noel, “her big sister Fiona” and “younger brother Dara”. “Both Fiona and Dara passed away in recent years — Fiona was 44 and Dara was just 35. They were my best friends growing up. I had another brother, Rory, who was killed in a road accident when he was just one year old. We talked about him all the time growing up. My mum Maura and dad Noel are the strongest and loveliest people I know,” she wrote. Poignantly, she described photographs she had of Fiona and Dara as her most treasured possessions. “They died of cancer within six months of each other and they both got a very short time to live. So I would definitely say that photographs of them and my brother Rory mean a great deal to me.”