Are you a saver or a spender? I would consider myself a bit of both. I am conscious of preparing for the future, and the extra support you might need. That said, I am a big believer in living and enjoying every day, so I think a balance is good. Do you shop around for better value? Value for money is important, but I will always pay for quality, especially when it comes to service. In business, too, I am conscious of delivering exceptional value to clients. What has been your most extravagant purchase ever and how much did it cost? My family and I moved to the Middle East, which was a big investment at the time, but so worthwhile as we found ourselves immersed in their diverse culture. It was an incredible experience. What purchase have you made that you consider the best value for money? Since moving to Wexford, I purchased bikes for myself and my two boys. We have certainly got our money’s worth, cycling along the greenway, and of all our purchases they are the most used and the most invaluable, as they allow us to spend time together as a family. What ways did you prefer to shop during the Covid-19 restrictions – online or local? I always shop local where possible. When you invest in local communities, they invest in you and everyone prospers. Do you haggle over prices? I love a good bargain, and I taught my two sons to haggle from when they were very young. At four and five years old, when we were living in Qatar, we used to go to the local Souq market, and they would haggle with the traders using their pocket money. I think it’s important to teach children the value of money, as it will stand to them in later life. How has the Covid-19 crisis changed your spending habits, and is there something in particular that you have either stopped buying or started buying, as a result? For me, and for a huge percentage of the population, Covid-19 has changed my focus and priorities, and put the important things in life into perspective. I now spend a lot more on experiences than products; I have put a renewed value on meaningful time with the people around me. I’ve also started investing more in my health and that of my family, from health insurance to check-ups. Do you invest in shares? I do, and I particularly like to support the start-up community through investing in new and innovative solutions to some of the more pressing issues in the world. Investors are the lifeblood of any business. Cash or card? Card. What was the last thing you bought and was it good value for money? I was privileged to be invited to Davos, Switzerland, several weeks ago, as CEO of HaloCare, one of four healthcare companies in the world taking part in the Sustainable Development Goals Labs 2022. So, after an exhilarating and intensive week, the last thing I bought was a chocolate fondue set for my children at the airport on the way home! The cost of living in Switzerland is high, so it was expensive but worth its weight in gold to see the reaction of my boys when I got home with it. Have you ever successfully saved up for a relatively big purchase? My first car. It was a Nissan Micra, and I was so proud of it that it might as well have been a Ferrari! Have you ever lost money? I certainly have over the years. Some investments and ventures pay off, and the ones that don’t are some of the hardest lessons, but they are often the ones you learn the most from and are what drives you to succeed the next time. Are you a gambler and if so have you ever had a big win? Apart from a flutter at the Galway races, I’m not a gambler. However, I take calculated risks where appropriate. As the Irish saying goes, you’ll never plough a field turning it over in your mind, so I’m a firm believer in gathering the data to support a decision and then acting on it, otherwise the opportunity will pass you by. Is money important to you? Financial security is very important to provide a roof over our heads, and food on the table, but nothing is as important as my children, family and friends. If Covid has taught us anything, it’s that the health and wellbeing of the people you love trump everything else. How much money do you have on you now? Nothing! I try to carry very little cash nowadays.