Nice to hear James McClean’s distinct Derry lilt in a period of relative calm. Normally the veteran winger appears to dampen flames or eyeball journalists for swinging critique of the manager, the team, the whole damn FAI. McClean is calmer than usual. McClean is funny as ever. McClean, fresh from a storming season with League One champions Wigan Athletic, is the nexus of this latest Irish revival. McClean took the frees and corners from Josh Cullen. Against Scotland, McClean’s left boot never cut so cleanly. “Whatever you give me, I’ll take.” McClean spoke to every subject, except the 3D mural of him painted by the artist ‘Aches’ that was unveiled last week on the Creggan estate. The mother and brother showed out for a snap beside giant-sized wee James. “Let’s wrap it up there.” The 33-year-old had said plenty. That McClean is sitting beside his Ireland manager for an eve of match press conference led the gallery to presume that he would wear the armband against Ukraine. “I have not been told that, I don’t know. This is up to the manager, obviously. ” Stephen Kenny interjects: “Absolutely no chance.” “I think Dave the chef will get it before I get it.” And, like Ray Liotta slamming the boot in Act 1 Scene 1 of Goodfellas, we are off to the races. Somebody has to lead this acutely inexperienced Ireland team after the leadership group of Séamus Coleman, John Egan and Shane Duffy were unceremoniously removed by injury, fatherhood and suspension respectively. Why not McClean, all 92 caps of him, wearing his heart (and not a poppy) on his sleeve? Why not now? “Every cap is special no matter what age you are. That’s the way it has always been for me anyway. You are representing your country, putting on the shirt. It is a special feeling. It doesn’t matter if it is my first cap or 150th it is still a special feeling. I think that’s the way it should be treated. “Confidence can be a bit low coming off the back of two defeats, but young lads are resilient. They just look forward to the next game. As senior lads, we’re here if they need any guidance. They play with no fear. Outside noise, good or bad, you can’t control it. That was something I was guilty of earlier in my career, getting caught up in that but as you get older, outside noise, good or bad, can’t affect what you do on the pitch. When you step over that white line it’s on you. We’ve got a good set of youngsters here who have good character about them. “They’ll be all right.” Literally, the kids are all right. Some of them are flying and McClean has no problem listing the star turns from Saturday’s 3-0 defeat of Scotland. “Nathan Collins at the back and the shift Jay Molumby put in the middle of the park, and if you look at the second and third goals, you can see what Troy [Parrot] and Michael can do.” More is the pity that Michael Obafemi’s groin gave up after his unforgettable strike ignited the Aviva crowd. Kenny interjects again: “From my point of view, I’ve known James for a long time, managing him as a young player [at Derry City], even when I took over as manager of the senior team I thought James was losing half a yard. He had a foot injury at the time, it was tough for him when he was at Stoke, I thought that maybe he could still be effective, but he was on a decline. “If anything he’s got quicker over the last year and it’s down to this rigorous training regime that he has. To get to the levels he’s got to is just phenomenal, it’s a great example to the young players because the longevity in his career is due to his absolute commitment to his physical condition. That’s the reason he has a great chance of continuing his career.” The home gym as a sanctuary to lace up gloves is the secret to his chiselled physique. “I love me boxing. So I do a lot of boxing. I enjoy the gym work as well. It’s my release. Whatever pressures or frustrations I have, it’s a way for me to release all that. “That’s a bit of a passion of mine. That goes hand in hand with that, and doing something I enjoy. “I’d train all day if my wife would let me. Unfortunately, I’ve three kids and she nags me about going to the gym. Whenever. I’m lucky that I’ve a nice gym at home so it’s not like I’ve to leave the house to go to the gym. I don’t know if that’s a good thing or bad thing. It’s right there. It’s stuff I’ve done all through my career. It’s served me well. At this stage, I don’t think there’s any point in changing now.” Nobody disagrees.