Conservative byelection defeats in Wakefield and Tiverton and Honiton were always going to be uncomfortable for Boris Johnson as they saw voters in both parts of his electoral coalition turning away from the party. The resignation of party chairman Oliver Dowden early on Friday morning has turned those losses into a moment of real peril for the prime minister, reviving the threat to his leadership less than three weeks after he survived a confidence vote. Until now, Johnson’s position has been shored up by the failure of any cabinet ministers to resign in protest against his behaviour over the lockdown-breaking parties in Downing Street. Dowden’s resignation letter was polite but unmistakable in its meaning, stressing his loyalty to the party but not to the prime minister. The resignation is important because it is the first crack in the cabinet’s support for Johnson but also because of Dowden’s position within the Conservative parliamentary party. When Dowden backed Johnson for the leadership in 2019 in a joint newspaper article with Rishi Sunak and Robert Jenrick, they represented the ambitious “coming men” of the party. By resigning now, Dowden is sending a signal to other MPs with hopes of a bright future that Johnson is an obstacle in their way. Labour won the Yorkshire seat of Wakefield by almost 5000 votes on a 12 per cent swing that would be enough for an overall majority at Westminster if it was replicated all over the country. The Liberal Democrats’ victory in the Devon seat of Tiverton and Honiton was more dramatic, overturning the biggest majority ever in a byelection. On a swing of almost 30 per cent, Liberal Democrat Richard Foord won by more than 6000 votes in a seat the Conservatives won by more than 24,000 in 2019. Both byelections saw impressive tactical voting, a sign that Labour voters may be ready to forgive the Liberal Democrats for their coalition with David Cameron and Liberal Democrat voters no longer fear Labour now that Jeremy Corbyn is gone. Under Conservative party rules, Johnson is safe from another confidence vote for the next 12 months and many MPs wish they had waited a few weeks before challenging him. Those rules can be changed by a vote of the executive committee of the backbench 1922 Committee and if the mood turns sharply against the prime minister, they will be. Johnson is in Rwanda for a Commonwealth summit and meetings of G7 and Nato leaders next week mean that he will not be back in Britain until next Friday. While he is gone, his MPs will be calculating what the swings in Thursday’s byelections mean for their own electoral prospects and considering what to do about it.