Leftover rice can be the basis for a soup, a fried rice dish, or even little fried arancini. One of my children’s favourite after-school snacks is cubed chorizo fried in a dry pan until it has crisped and the oils have released. Then I add leftover rice and mix it well to combine, placing the lid on to heat the rice thoroughly and let it absorb all of those smoky paprika spices. There’s something very comforting about eating a meal from a bowl with a spoon. It’s quite basic and not at all challenging, while still being nourishing and delicious. These spiced-beef meatballs are a fantastic way to use up leftover cooked rice. The rice absorbs the flavour from the beef and spices, binding the meatballs and making them an ideal easy dinner. I love to season these with smoked sweet paprika and toasted cumin. They’re earthy, smoky and so good with the avocado crema and some bright fresh salsa. I like to serve these with a warmed soft corn tortilla, or with some crunchy tortilla chips. The meatballs are oven-baked and take on a nice golden colour, with a crunchy exterior once cooked. These can be prepped ahead of time and kept in the fridge, ready to pop in a hot oven when needed. Wholegrain rice or regular white or basmati will all work for these. I always cook a little more than I need in order to have leftover rice. When dealing with leftover rice, it is important to ensure it cools down fast — within the hour. Spread it flat on a tray or plate to speed up the process, then store it in a sealed container in the fridge. Reheat the rice within 24 hours. Ensure it is piping hot the whole way through. I find microwaves heat food unevenly. I reheat rice by placing it in a saucepan or frying pan, then adding a few tablespoons of water and covering with a lid so it can steam on a high heat, stirring it to ensure it’s hot throughout. To make fried rice, think fast and hot. Place a little oil in a wok or frying pan over a high heat, tip the rice in with fragrant spices and some whisked egg, then move it all around until cooked through, crisp in places and piping hot. Dinner is never far from the table once you have cooked rice in the fridge. Recipe: Spiced beef meatballs with avocado crema