A Bill introduced by Green Party senator Vincent Martin for the protection of the native Irish honey bee attracted impassioned, well-informed support from all parties and independents in the upper house last week. The essential role played by native pollinators in our prosperity, and even our survival, was repeatedly recognised. While the news on the environmental front grows grimmer daily, this debate was a positive indication that the need to respond is being more widely accepted across the political spectrum. But it still much too early to say that there is sufficient momentum to begin to tackle the climate and biodiversity crises effectively. The native Irish honey bee, or black bee, Apis mellifera mellifera was thought to be extinct here, and has indeed vanished from many northern European countries, largely because of the importation of alien honey bees by bee-keepers. However, research by NUI Galway shows that the native species survives here, both in the wild and in beehives. This was good news for bee keepers, as it is calmer than other species and, crucially, the Irish species has developed some immunity to a mite that is wiping out bee populations elsewhere. However, further research shows that a rapidly rising number of native swarms are having these qualities diluted by hybridisation with imported species. So the Bill proposes to ban the importation of honey bees. It was striking that almost every speaker expressed concerns that the civil service would obstruct this cross-party initiative. Officials in the Department of Agriculture argue that it may violate EU free trade provisions. Speakers stressed that there are clear exceptions to these provisions where a country’s native biodiversity is threatened. So it was worrisome that Minister of State Pippa Hackett appeared to give these arguments some credence in her response to the debate. State inertia has contributed significantly to Ireland’s abysmal record on protecting native species. It must not be allowed to hold back a welcome, if long overdue, political tide.