Specialist anaesthesiology trainee at University Hospital Galway and member of Irish Doctors for the Environment The one small change I would like to see in the Irish healthcare system is the availability of more nutritious and sustainable food for hospital staff. Before Covid-19, I spent time in a hospital in Auckland, New Zealand which had two cafes with a varied selection of fresh healthy food (as well as some less healthy options), a good staff canteen and a sushi restaurant. Having access to healthy options gives you something to look forward to during a busy shift. Healthy food also helps you work better. Often in Irish hospitals, the standard fare is chicken fillet rolls, chips or pre-made sandwiches with very little choice for vegetarians. If you arrive late for lunch, there is often nothing left except protein bars and chocolate. Another problem is most staff canteens close at 3pm and are only open during the week. The healthcare system is a 24/7 service so provision of healthy food for staff should be a priority. I haven’t tried the hospital food for patients but it doesn’t look or smell great. The food pyramid seems to have been turned upside down with an overemphasis on meat, dairy, cereals and animal fat and a lack of fresh, healthy options. What we need is a sustainable diet with more emphasis on vegetables, wholegrains, legumes and nuts. What we eat has the potential to nurture human health and support environmental sustainability. Thus, our health service should be a pioneer of healthy sustainable food. Napoleon famously declared that an army marches on its stomach. I don’t think he would be impressed by what’s on offer for the army of healthcare workers in Ireland. - As our health system begins to return to normal activity levels following the Covid-19 pandemic, we would like to hear about one change you would like to see in our health system. It can be something simple that annoys you, day in, day out, that is easily fixed, or it can be a small change in practice or attitude that would make life easier for everyone. Email health@irishtimes.com with your suggestion or fill in the form below.