Permanent TSB’s (PTSB) net loss narrowed by almost 90 per cent last year as it started to release some of the Covid-19 loan-loss provisions taken in 2020. The lender reported a €20 million loss for 2021, compared with a €162 million shortfall for the previous year, which had been hit by a €155 million charge for potential bad loans as a result of the pandemic. Some €1 million of these were freed up last year, the bank said on Wednesday as it reported its annual results. The loss for 2021 was driven by PTSB booking €38 million of net exceptional charges, including €28 million of advisory costs in relation to its planned acquisition of €6.8 billion of mortgages and small business loans as well as 25 branches from Ulster Bank as the latter retreats from the market. The bank also set aside €15 million for legacy legal costs. Transformational year Chief executive Eamonn Crowley described the Ulster Bank deal as making 2021 a “transformational year” as it will increase the size of PTSB’s loan book by over 40 per cent. The size of the Ulster Bank portfolio set to be transferred, subject to approval from the competition watchdog, stood at €7.6 billion when the deal was agreed last year. However, it is expected to have fallen back to €6.8 billion by the time it is completed. “We are also preparing to welcome Ulster Bank deposit and current account customers, who will need a new provider with an attractive offering, a strong community and customer ethos, and a nationwide branch network that is growing,” he said. PTSB is alone among the remaining three banks in the market in needing additional deposits as it needs additional funds to help acquire the Ulster Bank loans. The bank’s total performing book grew by €200 million last year to €14 billion with new lending offsetting repayments. Non-performing loans declined by €300 million to €800 million through a combination of loan sale and “organic cures”. “As we begin 2022, there is some optimism that the pandemic might finally have come to an end as the more virulent but less severe Omicron strain fades over the coming months. Some uncertainties remain – the residual impacts of Covid-19 together with the emerging geo-political developments in Eastern Europe – however, the outlook across our core markets is positive,” the bank said.