Micromobility operator Zipp Mobility is to launch a new shared e-bike service as part of a pilot scheme with Dún Laoghaire-Rathdown County Council, marking its first service in the Republic. The electric bikes will be available to rent in various locations across the county immediately, with plans to expand the fleet over time. Potential users need to download the Zipp Mobility app, create an account and scan one of the company’s e-bikes. There are designated parking locations and Sheffield bike stands for the bikes. The Nova UCD-headquartered company, which has operations in eight cities in the UK and Poland, is planning to launch shared e-bike services in other cities across the State later this year. Zipp also plans to launch daily, weekly and monthly passes for the service in the coming weeks. “We started Zipp to bring sustainable, safe and community-centric transport solutions to Irish towns and cities, so we are so excited to be able to finally launch on home soil,” said Charlie Gleeson, chief executive and founder of Zipp Mobility. “Dún Laoghaire-Rathdown County Council are a true trailblazer in the sustainable mobility space, and we are so proud to be partnering with them as we seek to bring ‘mobility done right’ to Irish communities.” The company said its Dublin operation will use only zero-emissions vehicles such as e-cargo bikes, and a local team will be hired to run the operation. Established in 2019, Zipp Mobility has raised €2.1 million in funding from a number of private and angel investors. Its backers include former Irish rugby international Brian O’Driscoll, Balderton Capital’s Barry Maloney, Enterprise Ireland, and through a crowdfunding campaign on the Spark crowdfunding platform. It plans to launch shared e-scooter services in several Irish towns and cities including Dublin, Cork, Limerick, Galway, Kildare and Waterford once the Road Traffic and Roads Bill 2021 is passed into law. The company is also planning to begin operations in Spain later this year. It employs 25 people at its offices in Dublin, the UK, Spain and Poland and plans to create 50 jobs in the Republic over the next year.