Green Party TD Patrick Costello is one of more than 60 parties to oppose a planned 137 build-to-rent unit apartment scheme for Herberton Road in Rialto, Dublin 12. Herberton Road Developments Ltd had lodged “fast-track” plans for the scheme which comprises six apartment blocks, with one rising to eight storeys, at the former G4S property on Herberton Road. The company bought the site in November 2019. A planning report lodged with the scheme claims the redevelopment of the existing site, which houses vacant buildings in a state of disrepair, will greatly enhance the character and appearance of the Grand Canal Conservation Area. The report describes the planned density as “appropriate” to efficiently and sustainably redevelop the site. In a joint submission with party colleague Cllr Carolyn Moore, Dublin South Central TD Patrick Costello has told An Bord Pleanála of serious reservations about the suitability of the scheme and the implications it will have on the sustainable development of Drimnagh. In a separate submission, local residents Elaine McCaughley and Paul Madden said they welcomed the development of the site but considered this application to be “completely unsuitable”.  “The buy-to-let model and high proportion of one-bed units does not meet the housing needs of families in the immediate area or the city. This proposal does not provide homes, which are urgently needed,” they said. Opposition to the scheme has been boosted by Dublin City Council recommending a refusal to An Bord Pleanála. Overdevelopment In a report lodged with the appeals board, the council said the plan represented overdevelopment, would have a serious negative impact on the residential and visual amenities of the area and the future development potential of adjoining sites, and would provide a poor level of residential amenity in terms of the quality of communal open space. “Furthermore, it is considered that the proposal would have a negative impact on the development potential of adjoining property,” the council said. An Bord Pleanála is due to decide on the application by next month.