Chelsea have agreed to withdraw their request for the FA Cup quarter-final against Middlesbrough to be played without fans, the Football Association has announced. An FA spokesperson said: “After constructive talks between the FA and Chelsea, the club has agreed to remove their request for the Emirates FA Cup quarter-final tie against Middlesbrough to be played behind closed doors. “The FA remains in ongoing discussions with Chelsea, the Premier League and the government to find a solution that would enable both Chelsea fans to attend games and away fans to attend Stamford Bridge, whilst ensuring sanctions are respected.” The Blues have lobbied government hard over relaxations to the strict operating licence put in place after owner Roman Abramovich was sanctioned by Downing Street. Under the sanctions Chelsea are blocked from selling tickets for the Riverside clash. Russian-Israeli billionaire Abramovich must not profit in the UK under the government sanctions introduced after ministers accused him of having “clear connections” to Vladimir Putin’s regime. Chelsea are blocked from selling any more tickets in the terms of their new licence. After talks with the government failed to yield a softening on that ticket stance, the Blues questioned the FA Cup quarter-final’s “sporting integrity” should Chelsea fans be barred from attending. “We are disappointed to announce we will not be able to sell tickets for Saturday’s FA Cup tie at Middlesbrough,” read a Chelsea statement. “Despite engaging in extensive discussions with the Office of Financial Sanctions Implementation (OFSI), the deadline to purchase away tickets has passed without appropriate amendments being made to the Government licence which would allow a full allocation of Chelsea supporters to attend. “Executives at Middlesbrough had been kind enough to extend their deadline for ticket sales and stadium allocation from 7.30pm last night until 9.30am this morning. “It is important for the competition that the match against Middlesbrough goes ahead, however it is with extreme reluctance that we are asking the FA board to direct that the game be played behind closed doors for matters of sporting integrity. “Chelsea FC recognises that such an outcome would have a huge impact on Middlesbrough and its supporters, as well as our own fans who have already bought the limited number of tickets that were sold before the licence was imposed, but we believe this is the fairest way of proceeding in the current circumstances. FA chief executive Mark Bullingham was being grilled by a Digital, Culture, Media and Sport select committee at the time the news broke about Chelsea’s request. When pushed for a response from the parliamentary panel, he said: “When we step back and look at what the government is trying to achieve with the sanctions on Mr Abramovich, it’s clearly to put pressure on Mr Putin. “I don’t believe the intention is to prevent Chelsea fans going to games or away fans to come to Stamford Bridge. It’s incredibly complicated to put a sanction in place at short notice and that will all need working through. “I think the end-state will be something where the government lends a licence to allow fans to go to games. I think that hasn’t been possible in time for this weekend. “What Chelsea are going to do is appeal to the FA Cup committee and that will take a view on what should happen. My personal point of view would be: I would expect the game to go ahead but I can’t say more than that. “It could prejudice any discussions that are going on at the moment. There’s a due process to be followed and I’m sure they get to the right conclusion. I can’t say more to prejudice the outcome of that proceeding.”