Chapters Bookstore has announced it is reopening under new ownership on Friday. After almost 40 years in business, the popular bookstore on Parnell Street closed its doors on January 31st amid a flood of support. “We were shocked and amazed at the outpouring of emotion and affection that was directed our way,” Chapters said on Tuesday. “The queues down the street, media coverage, lovely posts, and comments online, not to mention the fantastic interaction in the store made a sad moment bittersweet.” “We just couldn’t let it go!” the shop said on its Twitter account on Tuesday. The cherished bookstore will also remain in its Parnell Street location. Retired founder Willie Kinsella has sold the business to Kevin Neary and Michael Finucane, co-founders and former directors of GameStop Ireland. The pair set up Gamesworld in the back of the original Chapters location on Middle Abbey Street, Dublin, in 1994 with about 300sq ft (28sq m) in the back of the shop. The business rebranded to GameStop in 2003. “That 300sq feet grew into GameStop Ireland,” says Finucane. “It was a great journey but it had its roots in Chapters” where Kinsella “mentored” the young businessmen. “Like everybody else, we were very sorry to see it close. So we reached out to Willie to see if anything could be done.” “We’re hoping to keep all the good things that people loved about Chapters,” says Finucane. “Chapters has done so many things right over the years, and that’s why it’s held with such great affection.” When asked about trading in old books to the store, a key part of its appeal to Dubliners, Chapters said they will be welcome when the store reopens. Although the ownership of the business has changed, Chapters will retain the same managemnt and staff when it reopens on Friday. The new owners will also launch a new website later this month which will allow customers to purchase books online for the first time at Chapters. Finucane says Kinsella hopes the shop is cherished in the same way as he did.