Henrik Stenson has won the race to be named as Europe’s captain for the 2023 Ryder Cup, pipping Luke Donald to the post after giving sufficient assurances regarding his rejection of the Saudi Arabia-backed breakaway tour. Stenson and Donald were the frontrunners to lead Europe’s attempt to reclaim the trophy in Rome after Lee Westwood surprisingly withdrew his name from the captaincy race. Robert Karlsson and Paul Lawrie completed a four-man shortlist presented to a European Ryder Cup selection panel. There was always the prevailing sense, though, that the role was Stenson’s to lose, and so it has proven. “I am absolutely thrilled and delighted to be the European Ryder Cup captain – it is a huge honour and I was humbled to get the call confirming the news,” said the Swede, who was a vice-captain under Pádraig Harrington for Europe’s 19-9 defeat to the United States at Whistling Straits last September. “I would like to thank the selection panel for believing in me and will say to them, and every European golf fan, that I will do everything in my power and leave no stone unturned in the quest to get the Ryder Cup back in European hands.” As a player, the 2016 Open champion – who becomes the first Swede to be captain – has won 11 points from 19 Ryder Cup matches. “The Ryder Cup is golf, and sport, at its very best,” he added. “I got goosebumps every time I pulled on a European shirt as a player and that will be magnified in the role of captain. When I started out as a professional golfer, it was beyond my wildest dreams that, one day, I would follow in the footsteps of legends of the game such as Seve [Ballesteros] and be the European Ryder Cup captain. But today proves that, sometimes, dreams do come true.” Stenson’s appointment was complicated by his close links with the Saudi proposal fronted by Greg Norman. The DP World – formerly European – Tour stands in direct opposition to the scheme. It has been an open secret in golf that Stenson, a former Open champion, would have to provide continuing commitment to the DP World Tour before his captaincy status could be endorsed. The Swede is known to have held discussions with Keith Pelley, the DP World Tour’s chief executive, and the Ryder Cup director Guy Kinnings last week at the Players Championship in the buildup yesterday’s decision. The captain of the US team has already been confirmed as Zach Johnson. – Guardian