An Bord Pleanála has given the green light to fast-track plans for 227 apartments at Knockrabo at Mount Anville Road, Goatstown, Dublin 14. The appeals board has granted planning permission to Knockrabo Investments DAC for the four apartment block scheme rising to eight storeys despite local opposition and strong recommendation of Dún Laoghaire-Rathdown County Council that permission should be refused. The site already had planning permission for 93 units. The scheme will comprise 76 one-bed units, 145 two-bed and six three-bed. The board granted permission after concluding that the scheme would constitute an acceptable residential density at this location and would not seriously injure the area’s residential or visual amenities. Structures Planning inspector Una O’Neill found that the scheme would “not significantly detract from the visual amenities of the area, and will not detract from the character and setting of existing protected structures”. Ms O’Neill also concluded that the scheme would be acceptable in terms of urban design, height and quantum of development. Sinn Féin TD Chris Andrews objected to it, noting excessive density of the proposal and negative visual impact. The Birchfield Residents Association Committee claimed the scheme “is an obvious attempt by the developer to cram in as much as possible before expiry of the current Strategic Housing Development process”. The committee also said it was “neither appropriate nor beneficial to the wider Goatstown community and should be rejected”. The committee also argued that the proposal is twice the recommended maximum height in the Local Area Plan and out of character with the surrounding area. Refusal The council recommended refusal on several points including that the proposed development is considered monolithic and imposing when viewed from within the site and surrounding areas. It also concluded that the proposed development would have a detrimental impact on the setting and amenity of protected structures, Cedar Mount House and Knockrabo Gate Lodge West. The council also stated that the eight-storey proposed development would create a visually dominant and overbearing form of development when viewed from several points and would significantly injure the visual amenities of the area.