Kerry TD Michael Healy-Rae says he will not be apologising to Tánaiste Leo Varadkar for telling him to go off “to the airy fairies” during a Dáil debate. Mr Varadkar, one of a small number of gay TDs and Senators in the Oireachtas, urged Mr Healy-Rae to reflect on his comments and “take it back if you want to”. However, Mr Healy-Rae said he would not be saying sorry and suggested the Tánaiste was deflecting attention from issues he had been raising in the Dáil on Tuesday around the development of a liquid natural gas facility in North Kerry. Speaking on RTÉ Radio Liveline programme, the Kerry TD was asked about his use of “airy fairies” during the exchanges. “Any time I’ve ever used it I have used it to describe something that I would consider to be nonsensical,” Mr Healy-Rae replied. “I would never set out to offend or upset anyone and the Tánaiste knows that.” Liveline presenter Joe Duffy asked Mr Healy-Rae about an Irish Times article by Miriam Lord, in which she wrote: “He may have been thoughtless, but Healy-Rae was out of order. He should apologise.” Mr Healy-Rae said that in his opinion “she got it wrong.” Asked further if he would apologise, the Independent TD responded: “I can’t apologise when there is nothing to apologise for.” Mr Healy-Rae said it was not a clumsy use of the phrase. If it had been the first time he had used the expression, that would be a different story, he said. The whole argument was “lopsided”. Dyslexia The Kerry TD argued that the fact that he had dyslexia could have been used as grounds to take offence at some of Mr Varadkar’s comments, suggesting the Tánaiste had spoken down to him. The Tánaiste “in his heart and soul” knew that Mr Healy-Rae would not abuse a person about their personal life which was “nothing to do with me”. He “absolutely 100 percent supported gay rights” and dealt with issues facing gay constituents on a regular basis. If anyone asked him for help, he did so, he said, and it was unfair to try to make something out of it. When asked if he thought Mr Varadkar had been brave when he came out in 2015, Mr Healy-Rae said that it was “entirely his own business”. The Kerry TD said he had not been involved in campaigning on either side of the marriage equality referendum in 2015, but acknowledged that he had not voted in favour of the referendum. “I did not set out to hinder anyone, they can do what they want. Why would I be against anyone for being gay? It’s their business, not anyone else’s business.” At a press conference on Wednesday morning, prior to Mr Healy-Rae’s remarks on Liveline, Mr Varadkar said he did not ask for an apology from the Kerry TD. He said of their Dáil interaction: “He said what he said. I said what I said. I have certainly haven’t lost any sleep about it. “I just asked him to reflect on it. I didn’t ask him to apologise.” Mr Varadkar added: “I think the truth is all of us from time to time can say things that might be racist, homophobic or misogynistic or misandristic. “That can happen and I think that when it’s called out people should acknowledge it. But, you know… I’m not a fan of pile-ons or cancel culture either.” Put to him that Mr Varadkar was saying Mr Healy-Rae’s remarks were homophobic Mr Varadkar replied: “Look I’m not... I’m saying what I said. That’s all I’m saying.”