A first convoy of residents and foreign students has left the Ukrainian city of Sumy after an agreement with Russia on establishing a humanitarian corridor, officials said on Tuesday. “We have already started the evacuation of civilians from Sumy to Poltava (in central Ukraine), including foreign students,” the foreign ministry said in a tweet. “We call on Russia to agree on other humanitarian corridors in Ukraine.” Ukrainian officials said evacuations began from Sumy and from the town of Irpin near Kyiv on Tuesday. The move came after Russian and Ukrainian officials agreed to establish “humanitarian corridors” to allow civilians out of some towns and cities besieged by Russian forces. “As of 09:30 (0730 GMT), more than 150 people have been evacuated and (evacuation) activities are underway,” said Oleksiy Kuleba, governor of the Kyiv region. Civilians have been trapped by fighting since Russian troops invaded Ukraine on February 24th. Moscow calls its actions in Ukraine a “special military operation.” Russia opened humanitarian corridors on Tuesday from Kyiv, Chernihiv, Sumy, Kharkiv and Mariupol, the Interfax news agency quoted the Russian defence ministry as saying. The defence ministry added that Russian forces in Ukraine had introduced a “silent regime” from 7am GMT, Interfax reported. Ukraine on Monday rejected Russian proposals to evacuate Ukrainians to Russia or Belarus. Russia’s offensive in Ukraine continued but at a significantly slower pace on Tuesday, Ukraine’s armed forces said. Ukrainian military and intelligence earlier said a second senior Russian commander had been killed, as frightened residents fled bombed-out cities. Fears of an energy war between Russia and the West also grew on Tuesday after the United States pushed its allies to ban Russian oil imports as punishment for Moscow’s invasion of Ukraine. Children In the city of Irpin, on the northwest edge of Kyiv, residents ran with their young children in strollers, or cradling babies in arms, while others carried pet carriers and plastic bags and suitcases. “It’s like a disaster, the city is almost ruined, and the district where I’m living, it’s like there are no houses which were not bombed,” said one young mother, holding a baby beneath a blanket, while her daughter stood by her side. “Yesterday was the hardest bombing, and the lights and sound is so scary, and the whole building is shaking.” Ukraine’s military intelligence said on Tuesday that Ukrainian forces killed a Russian general near the besieged city of Kharkiv, the second Russian senior commander to die in the invasion. Major general Vitaly Gerasimov, first deputy commander of Russia’s 41st army, was killed on Monday, the chief directorate of intelligence of Ukraine’s defence ministry said in a statement. Ukraine’s general staff of the armed forces said the Russian offensive continues although at a significantly slower pace. Russia’s defence ministry could not be immediately reached for comment and Reuters could not verify the reports. Russia’s invasion, the biggest attack on a European state since the second World War, has created 1.7 million refugees, a raft of sanctions on Moscow, and fears of wider conflict as the West pours military aid into Ukraine. Russia calls its actions in Ukraine a “special operation” that it says is not designed to occupy territory but to destroy its southern neighbour’s military capabilities and capture what it regards as dangerous nationalists. Kyiv has rejected Moscow’s offer of possible humanitarian corridors to Russia and Belarus. However, Moscow has since proposed giving the residents of the cities of Sumy and Mariupol the choice of moving elsewhere in Ukraine on Tuesday, setting a deadline in the early hours for Kyiv to agree, Russian news agencies reported. After the third attempt to ease the bloodshed at talks in Belarus, negotiators warned not to expect the next round to bring a final result. The Russian and Ukrainian foreign ministers are expected to meet in Turkey on Thursday. Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov told Reuters Moscow would halt operations if Ukraine ceased fighting, amended its constitution to declare neutrality, and recognised Russia’s annexation of Crimea and the independence of regions held by Russian-backed separatists. Flow of gas Meanwhile, Russia warned it could stop the flow of gas through pipelines from Russia to Germany in response to Berlin’s decision last month to halt the opening of the controversial new Nord Stream 2 pipeline. Russia supplies 40 per cent of Europe’s gas. “We have every right to take a matching decision and impose an embargo on gas pumping through the Nord Stream 1 gas pipeline,” Russian deputy prime minister Alexander Novak said on Monday. Mr Novak also warned that oil prices could more than double to $300 (€276) a barrel if the United States and its allies banned imports of Russian oil, a crucial source of revenue after the country was effectively frozen out of Western financial markets. Analysts at Bank of America however said that if most of Russia’s oil exports were cut off there could be a shortfall of 5 million barrels per day (bpd) or more, pushing prices as high as $200 (€184). Oil prices see-sawed near 14-year highs on Tuesday, with Brent crude futures up $1.06 (90c), or 0.9 per cent, at $124.27 (€114.21) a barrel at 2.23am GMT, after trading as high as $125.19 (€115.16). US president Joe Biden held a video conference call with the leaders of France, Germany and Britain on Monday as he pushed for their support to ban Russian oil imports. But if need be, the United States was willing to move ahead without allies in Europe, two people familiar with the matter told Reuters. Many countries on the continent are heavily reliant on Russian energy. Japan tightened its sanctions on Tuesday, freezing the assets of an additional 32 Russian and Belarusian officials and executives of companies with close ties to the government. Estee Lauder Companies Inc joined a long list of firms exiting Russia, suspending all commercial activities and closing all its stores in the country. A senior US defence official said Russian president Vladimir Putin had now deployed nearly 100 per cent of the more than 150,000 forces that he had pre-staged outside Ukraine before the invasion. A Russian strike on a bread factory killed 13 in the town of Makariv in the Kyiv region, Ukrainian officials said. Reuters could not verify the details. Russia denies targeting civilians. In the encircled southern port city of Mariupol, hundreds of thousands of people remained trapped without food and water under regular bombardments. – Reuters