Food delivery workers doing 12- to 16-hour shifts for as little as £100 (€120) took part in Northern Ireland’s first “gig economy” strike on Wednesday to demand improved pay and conditions. More than 100 people, mainly from migrant communities, employed by phone app takeaway giants including Just Eat, Deliveroo, and Uber Eats, staged the six-hour action in Belfast. Rocketing fuel costs, wage cuts and the cost-of-living crisis led to the strike, which was organised by the App Drivers and Couriers Union (ADCU). With no holiday or sick pay entitlements as the couriers are “self employed independent contractors”, they are demanding “a minimum income guarantee of at least £10 per hour plus costs”. One worker, who wished to remain anonymous, said she must work at least 12 hours to make £100 – and is now putting £20 petrol into her car each day. “I’ve been working for Just Eat and Deliveroo since last August. The pay was quite good but last December Just Eat dropped our pay by 25 per cent. I’m doing a minimum of 12 hours a days and working of two different apps which is more stressful,” she said. “I have one son and [am] working these hours just to try to survive and pay my rent, but you’re really burning yourself out. My family don’t even see me.” Another worker, Lucen Rista, who moved from Romania to Belfast 12 years ago, has a four-year-old child and is working 16-hour shifts, six days a week, to support his family. “I have to pay diesel, car insurance and two meals a day – and I am the main provider in house. Last year it was [a] good price for us to make deliveries, but now I am struggling and I am exhausted,” he said. “I want to be paid £10 an hour.” Consumers were urged to support the walkout by not placing orders on major apps on Wednesday. As the striking staff gathered outside a McDonald’s on the Boucher Road, one worker was booed as he crossed the picket line to pick up a delivery. Discrimination James Farrar, ADCU general secretary, told The Irish Times that this was the beginning of a campaign to highlight the “brutal exploitation” of vulnerable workers by international “tech” companies to make profits. “This is the first gig economy strike in the north. However, it’s hard to build collective power against a social media platform so that’s why we asked consumers not to use the app today. Many of these companies are using migrant labour. That’s another big part of the exploitation picture, discrimination is a big maker here as well.” A Just Eat spokesperson said the company “takes any concerns raised by our couriers seriously. Our delivery payment model has been designed to give couriers the flexibility to deliver when they choose. We continue to offer a competitive base rate to self-employed couriers and pay is reviewed regularly.” A Deliveroo spokesman also defended the firm’s position and said it “is proud to offer flexible work to more than 50,000 self-employed riders across the UK. Our way of working is designed around what riders tell us matters to them most – flexibility – and we are pleased that more than 86 per cent of riders in Belfast tell us they are satisfied with Deliveroo.” Meanwhile, an Uber Eats representative said it offers a “flexible way for couriers to earn by using the app when and where they choose. We know that the vast majority of couriers are satisfied with their experience on the app, however we regularly engage with couriers to look at how we can improve their experience.”