The Prince of Wales and Duchess of Cornwall will pay a visit to Ireland’s oldest city on Thursday, as they continue their tour of the island. Prince Charles and his wife Camilla, who are on their sixth official joint trip to the Republic, will take in the sights of Waterford, fresh from their two-day stint in Northern Ireland. The royal couple will continue their journey to Co Tipperary where they will finish their visit on Friday. The three-day visit is part of the royal family’s spring tours to mark Queen Elizabeth’s platinum jubilee year. During the trip, the pair will meet local people, as well as first responders who worked to support others throughout the Covid pandemic. Charles, a passionate environmentalist, will also meet farmers, officials and community organisers to see the work they are doing to produce food and drink more sustainably in an effort to help the country meet climate change goals. The couple will also meet members of the Ukrainian community in Ireland. On Wednesday, during a reception in Belfast for local organisations involved in helping and supporting refugees from Ukraine, Charles spoke of his shock and concern at the war as he met a mother who fled Kyiv with her children. The royals’ Ireland tour is due to end with a trip to the Rock of Cashel, following in the footsteps of Charles’ mother, Queen Elizabeth, who went to the site during her historic state visit in 2011. Charles and Camilla were welcomed by crowds in County Tyrone and Belfast when they began their tour in Northern Ireland earlier this week. Traffic restrictions Meanwhile, gardaí have said traffic restrictions will be in place during the course of the royal visit, including temporary road closures to facilitate security escorts. Gardaí said: “An Garda Síochána are working to ensure that the nature and scale of our policing and security operation continues to be proportionate to the need to protect everyone’s safety. “While the Royal Highnesses will be visiting certain public attractions, access to the general public for viewing the visit is very limited in all locations.” On Thursday in Waterford City Centre, Parade Quay will close from the GPO roundabout to the junction of Catherine Street from 6am. Restrictions will commence to be lifted by 2pm. Gardaí said the royal visit will have limited impact in other locations in Waterford city and Co Waterford during Thursday afternoon. While in Tipperary, Cahir Castle will be restricted from Wednesday and the carpark will close from 5pm. Access to Castle Street, Bridge Street, The Square and adjoining roads will be restricted from 7am and restrictions should be lifted by 1pm on Friday. While in Cashel, access to the Rock of Cashel will be restricted from Wednesday and St Patrick’s Rock Car Park will close at 5pm. Access to roads adjacent to the Rock of Cashel and Brú Ború Heritage Centre, including Ladyswell Street, Rock Lane, The Kiln, Old Dublin Road (R639), Circular Road will be restricted from 7am. Restrictions should be lifted by 2pm on Friday.