Chief medical officer Dr Tony Holohan is to step down from his position this summer to take up the role of professor of public health strategy and leadership at Trinity College Dublin. Dr Holohan, who has been in the position for almost 15 years, became a national figure during the Covid crisis, when he led the National Public Health Emergency Team (Nphet). He will remain in his current role until July. A spokeswoman for the Department of Health said the the appointment of a new chief medical officer would be in line with normal processes, with support from the Top-Level Appointments Committee (TLAC). The committee’s function is to recommend candidates to ministers and government for the most senior positions in the civil service – at assistant secretary level and upwards. “The position will be filled in line with normal process, subject to appropriate sanction from Department of Public Expenditure and Reform,” the spokeswoman said. In a statement on Friday afternoon, Dr Holohan said it had been a “great privilege for me to serve as chief medical officer and to have had an opportunity to be directly involved in issues of great importance and relevance to the health of the people of Ireland. ” Dr Holohan has not appeared in the media or been active on social media for several weeks, since he recommended at the end of February that Nphet be stood down in favour of a new structure to advise Minister for Health Stephen Donnelly. His office continues to work on the Covid pandemic, advising Mr Donnelly on policy. Dr Holohan has been chief medical officer since late 2008, and worked as deputy chief medical officer at the department since 2001. ‘Lasting impact’ During his time in the role, he dealt with the swine flu pandemic and also controversy following the emergence of the CervicalCheck scandal. As news of his move was confirmed, Mr Donnelly said: “Since his appointment as chief medical officer in December 2008, Dr Holohan has made a significant and lasting impact on health in Ireland. “Throughout the pandemic his invaluable advice to me, and to the Government, has shaped our response to Covid-19, and I witnessed first-hand his unwavering dedication to protecting the health of the people of Ireland,” he said. The Taoiseach also expressed gratitude for Dr Holohan’s efforts during his time as chief medical officer and, in particular, through the pandemic. “His steadfast, assured advice, and willingness to communicate over the course of the Covid-19 pandemic, undoubtedly helped save lives and kept Ireland safe during an exceptionally challenging two years. “His work chairing the Nphet, his professionalism, and calm and personable nature gave us all the assurance we needed during the pandemic. I wish him and his family the very best of luck for the future,” he said. Wife’s death Dr Holohan’s wife, Emer Feely, died in February 2021 after a long illness. Dr Feely, a specialist in public health medicine and a medical graduate of UCD, had been battling a terminal form of blood cancer, multiple myeloma, since 2012. Dr Holohan took time out from his work duties to help with the care of his wife after she entered palliative care in July 2020. He said at the time that he wanted to give his “energy, attention and all of my time” to his wife and to their two teenage children. His role had been assumed by his deputy Dr Ronan Glynn until his return in October 2020. Separately, provost of Trinity Prof Linda Doyle said Dr Holohan would not be attached to a single school or discipline within Trinity. “Instead, his role will traverse the faculties of arts, humanities and social sciences and health sciences, recognising the complexity and scope of population health challenges in the modern era,” she said.