Iput plc has made a fresh bid to secure planning permission for its €250 million plan for the latest phase of the Park mixed-use scheme for Carrickmines. This follows the property firm lodging a first-party appeal to An Bord Pleanála against the decision by Dún Laoghaire-Rathdown County Council to refuse planning permission for the scheme. Iput is planning to construct a development known as Quadrant 3 at the Park. The scheme comprises a 25.7-acre site made up of 440 residential units, 31,082sq m of offices and 21,041sq m of community, retail and leisure facilities, including two supermarkets. An EY assessment lodged on behalf of Iput states that during construction, the project is expected to support up to 2,770 jobs over 3½ years with a labour spend of €28.6 million per annum. In the post-construction phase, the EY economic assessment states that the delivery of commercial office and retail space could support up to 4,000 jobs. No objection was lodged against the scheme but the council refused planning permission after concluding that due to the significant proportion of residential use proposed within the overall scheme, a satisfactory balance of uses would not be achieved for the site, which is primarily zoned for economic development. Limited lands The council pointed out that there is a limited quantum of undeveloped zoned economic development and employment lands available within the county and therefore the proposed scheme would undermine the county development plan, which seeks to ensure that sufficient serviced lands continue to be available for employment generation. The 440 residential units include 308 build-to-rent apartments across four apartment blocks, including one reaching to 11 storeys in height. The site already has planning permission from 2019 for a neighbourhood centre and 130 residential units and the new scheme will be substantially larger with 80 per cent more office space planned and more than three times the number of residential units. John Spain & Associates, planning consultants for the Henry J Lyons-designed scheme, stated: “The proposed development will consolidate the range of services currently offered at the Park, Carrickmines, and is suitably scaled to serve the existing and expanding communities at Carrickmines, Stepaside, Ballyogan and Glenamuck areas to the west of the M50.” A decision is due on the appeal in July.