Anthony Eddy has left his role as director of sevens and women’s rugby with immediate effect, the IRFU has announced. The Women’s Six Nations gets underway at the end of this month and Eddy will not be in his role for the championship after deciding to depart. The next commitment for the men’s and women’s sevens sides is not until April. During Eddy’s tenure, the men’s sevens side qualified for the Olympic Games for the first time. Eddy had courted recent controversy when seeming to suggest that the blame for the women’s side failing to qualify for the World Cup lay at the feet of the players. A number of that senior squad responded strongly against this, including hooker Cliodhna Moloney who labelled his comments as “slurry spreading.” A number of current and former internationals have since written to the Government expressing their lack of confidence in the IRFU for a number of different reasons. The Australian has cited the stress of working so far from home as one of the factors behind his decision to leave. “I am proud of each of the teams, the athletes, and staff that I have worked with” said Eddy upon the announcement of his departure. “I wish all these people and teams the very best and thank the IRFU for their understanding. “The last two years during Covid have given me time to reflect on the next phase of my career and life. It can be difficult living so far from home, family and friends. Having assessed everything, I’ve decided to change things up, and seek new opportunities.” IRFU performance director David Nucifora thanked Eddy for his time with the governing body: “I want to thank Anthony for the commitment and expertise he brought to his role. The IRFU have been very fortunate to have had someone of the calibre of Anthony to have built these programmes up from nothing. I wish him the very best of luck for any new challenge he takes up. “The programmes will continue for now with existing staffing while we take some time to look for suitably qualified coaches to replace Anthony.”