A 42-year-old man has been remanded in custody after he was charged with the murder of his brother and the attempted murder of his father at their family home in Co Cork over the weekend. John Murphy jnr of Seaview Avenue, Carrigaline, was charged on Monday with the murder of his brother Shane Murphy (27) at Seaview Avenue, Carrigaline, on March 26th, contrary to Common Law. Mr Murphy was charged with a second offence of the attempted murder of his father, John “Weeshie” Murphy snr (75), also on March 26th at Seaview Avenue, contrary to Common Law. He was further charged with a third offence that while committing the murder of Shane Murphy, he produced a knife capable of inflicting serious injury at the same date and place. He was further charged with a fourth offence that while committing the attempted murder of John Murphy snr, he also produced a knife capable of inflicting serious injury on the same occasion. Both these additional charges are contrary to Section 11 of the Firearms and Offensive Weapons Act 1990, the court was told by arresting officer, Det Garda Ian Breen. Det Garda Breen gave evidence of arrest, charge and caution and told the court that Mr Murphy made no reply to any of the four charges when they were put to him after caution. Sgt Pat Lyons told the court that Mr Murphy could not apply for bail on the murder or attempted murder charges and he was not applying for bail on the production of a knife charges. He said that gardaí were seeking a remand in custody for a week for Mr Murphy to appear again at Cork District Court on April 4th by video link. Defence solicitor Frank Buttimer confirmed that his client could not apply for bail on the murder and attempted murder charges and would not be applying at this stage for bail on the other charges. He said that while Mr Murphy was in custody he required medical treatment and he asked that the governor of Cork Prison ensure he received any necessary medical treatment while in custody. Judge Olann Kelleher remanded Mr Murphy in custody to appear in court again on April 4th and he requested the prison authorities to ensure he receive any necessary medical treatment while in custody. Mr Murphy didn’t speak during the brief hearing which was attended by his sister Tanya who was accompanied by family members and a Garda family liaison officer at the Anglesea Street Courthouse.