Mack Hansen, Jack Conan and Iain Henderson have been restored to the Irish starting XV for Saturday’s concluding Guinness 2022 Six Nations game against Scotland at the Aviva Stadium (kick-off 4.45pm, live on Virgin Media 1 and ITV). In addition to those three changes, Kieran Treadwell has been restored to the bench after marking his return following an absence of over four years with a try against Italy, while Peter O’Mahony reverts to the replacements in an otherwise unaltered match-day 23. After hitting the ground running with Connacht, the 23-year-old Hansen made an impressive Test debut on the left wing in Ireland’s opening Six Nations game against Wales on the left wing, and remained there for the second round match in the Stade de France when he scored a brilliantly opportunist first try in international rugby. He was then moved to the right wing for the Italian game when James Lowe was restored and, it transpired, Andrew Conway had been ruled out with a bruised knee. Conway was then restored for last week’s 32-15 win over England in Twickenham but now Hansen is back on the right wing again for his fourth cap, as Conway is again “being managed for a knee niggle”. It was always anticipated that Henderson would continue in the secondrow after coming on in the second minute of Ireland’s 32-15 win at Twickenham last week as a replacement for the concussed James Ryan, who was ruled out of this tilt at a Triple Crown as a result. Andy Farrell singled out Conan after he made a telling try-scoring impact in the last quarter at Twickenham after replacing O’Mahony, as Ireland reverted to the starting backrow for the first two games against Wales and France. With Conan now restored, Farrell and his assistant coaches have thus reverted to that all-Leinster loose forward trio. Not surprisingly, they have also made a statement of faith in the starting frontrow at Twickenham, and after their feedback from World Rugby indicated several of the six scrum penalties Ireland conceded were erroneous decisions by referee Mathie Raynal. In what was likely to have been another close call Bundee Aki has retained his place at inside centre alongside Garry Ringrose despite the big impact made by Robbie Henshaw after replacing his one-time Connacht midfield partner in the 66th minute at Twickenham. However, while Henshaw has been troubled by injuries in a restricted campaign this season, effectively whenever Aki has been fully fit he has been selected to start, against both Japan and New Zealand in November, against Wales, France and England, and now again on Saturday. Johnny Sexton will become Ireland’s joint sixth most capped player, equalling John Hayes’ cap tally for Ireland (105) when he leads the side out on Saturday afternoon. Ireland: Hugo Keenan (Leinster/UCD); Mack Hansen (Connacht), Garry Ringrose (Leinster/UCD), Bundee Aki (Connacht/Galwegians), James Lowe (Leinster); Johnny Sexton (Leinster/St Mary’s College, capt), Jamison Gibson Park (Leinster); Cian Healy (Leinster/Clontarf), Dan Sheehan (Leinster/Lansdowne), Tadhg Furlong (Leinster/Clontarf); Tadhg Beirne (Munster/Lansdowne), Iain Henderson (Ulster/Academy); Caelan Doris (Leinster/St Mary’s College, Josh van der Flier (Leinster/UCD), Jack Conan (Leinster/Old Belvedere). Replacements: Rob Herring (Ulster/Ballynahinch), Dave Kilcoyne (Munster/UL Bohemians, Finlay Bealham (Connacht/Buccaneers), Kieran Treadwell (Ulster/Ballymena), Peter O’Mahony (Munster/Cork Constitution), Conor Murray (Munster/Garryowen), Joey Carbery (Munster/Clontarf), Robbie Henshaw (Leinster/Buccaneers). Referee: Wayne Barnes (RFU) ARs: Karl Dickson (RFU) & Christophe Ridley (RFU) TMO: Stuart Terheege (RFU)