When word came through earlier this month, says Louise Tobin, there was “excitement and amazement” in the school corridors. St Joseph’s Primary School – along with four other primary schools in Tipperary town had finally secured long-awaited resources under the Deis (Delivering Equality in Schools) programme. “It was a battle, there’s no doubt about that, but we got the right result after six years of campaigning,” she said. “In September we’ll at last have the extra resources to enable our pupils and all those in the town to access a good primary education with all the extra resources and supports needed to bridge the gaps . . . We’re looking forward to a brighter future for our young children.” Over at Scoil Íosagáin Infant National School in Mallow, Co Cork, the reaction was very different. “Honestly, I cried for about half an hour,” principal Linda Dennehy said, after learning that her school had failed to secure Deis status. “It was that upsetting for a school like ours. We put so much work into contacting TDs, having questions raised in the Dáil, and highlighting the needs of our children.” She says it meant the schools would not get access to training programmes for early literacy or numeracy programmes, or smaller class sizes. The needs are acute, she says, given that it has two special classes and enrols children from the local direct provision centre. “It was a shock not to be on the list . . . Our needs are very real, but it seems some areas are more favoured than others.” Reactions These contrasting reactions were shared across many schools when the Minister for Education announced an expansion of the Deis programme. In all, some 310 schools’ students will benefit from additional supports – such as additional teaching posts, free schoolbooks and home supports for students – under the programmes. The €32 million expansion of the scheme means almost 1,200 schools attended by one in four students will have Deis status from September 2022. “This is the single biggest investment in educational disadvantage in the history of the State,” said Minister for Education Norma Foley, at the announcement. “Equality of opportunity in education must be a primary objective. Since becoming Minister, I have been very keen to ensure to the absolute maximum that we make available to our students that very opportunity.” The Department of Education says schools were identified through a deprivation index based on the census which captures a greater breadth and severity of disadvantage. However, the announcement has also sparked a wider debate about the Deis programme itself. While it has been in operation since 2005, and while it has been the subject of a number of evaluations, some critics argue that no fundamental review and restructuring of the scheme has taken place. So, is it fit for purpose? Does it ensure all schools who need support get it? Is the gap being narrowed sufficiently? And should the lingering effects of the Covid-19 pandemic and school closures prompt a rethink of how we tackle social inequality in education? Gap Studies by the Educational Research Centre (ERC) show that students in Deis schools had lower average scores in reading, maths and science compared with non-Deis schools in 2018. However, the gap has narrowed in some key areas such as reading (See panel). Foley said recently that the impact of the programme is attracting international attention. However, Prof Judith Harford and Dr Brian Fleming of UCD’s School of Education argue that while the evidence suggests some progress has been made, it seems fairly clear that such progress has been limited, despite the scheme spanning over 16 years, “Our research indicates that the Deis scheme is grossly under-funded relative to the challenges faced by school communities in endeavouring to meet the needs of their students,” they say. “The scheme is also poorly structured in that it fails to address the particular organisational needs of schools in the scheme in any meaningful way.” Prof Selina McCoy and Eamonn Farrell, a postdoctoral research fellow, of the ESRI also argue that key metrics – such as the gap in school completion rates between Deis and non-Deis school – have remained stubbornly persistent and, in fact, increased in recent years. They point to recent ERC analysis which compared home and school learning environments, wellbeing, attitudes, and aspirations of 15-year-olds in schools. Students in schools in areas of socio-economic disadvantage were more likely to lose out on learning because of using alcohol and drugs, missing school without authorisation, and not being attentive in class. They also had fewer educational resources in their homes and were less likely to aspire to go to higher education. Identified A key argument is whether schools that need support are being identified – and whether the system is sophisticated enough to respond to individual needs. The late researcher Trutz Haase, who helped devise the deprivation index which is used to identify schools in need, argued that a sliding scale of support for schools was the best way to respond to educational need rather than a simple “in-out” scheme. Harford and Fleming also point out that, for schools in the programme, Deis operates at three levels or bands reflecting the scale of disadvantage evident in a school. No such system exists in Deis schools at post-primary level. “The notion that all post-primary schools serving disadvantaged areas are the same has always been absurd. The recent announcement doesn’t make clear whether this approach is being reformed or not. If the latter, it is extremely disappointing, given that the more detailed figures now available would facilitate such a move,” they say. Complex Educational disadvantage, however, is complex and intractable. Most agree that the Deis scheme cannot do the heavy-lifting on its own. McCoy and Farrell say that the difficulties of the Covid-19 period have shown that educational inequality cannot be solved by the education system alone. The pandemic highlighted the gap in students’ home learning environments which were more likely than the school learning environment to reproduce social inequalities. While almost all students will suffer some delay or loss of learning as a result, they say the level and impact of this delay or loss will generally be higher among those experiencing difficulties. As well as greater challenges in comprehending material without properly differentiated instruction, the lack of the non-academic features of the classroom impacts more on those struggling with the academic material. Deis schools, in particular, are on the front line in dealing with students’ issues in physical and mental health, housing, and poverty, but these issues cannot be solved by teachers or school leaders. What happens in the classroom is unlikely to overcome what happens outside it when a child is waiting months or years for access to therapeutic supports, access to child and adolescent mental health services or suitable accommodation. “As a society, we must ask ourselves whether this is the level of funding we are willing to commit to tackling educational disadvantage in schools and, by extension, whether this is the level of inequality we are willing to tolerate,” McCoy and Farrell wrote, in a recent article for Education Matters Yearbook. “As we return to ‘business as usual’, it is vital that we repair the damage done by two years of unprecedented disruption. Yet we cannot simply accept the restoration of pre-pandemic levels of inequality either. Educational inequality is a systemic phenomenon and must be addressed structurally and not just in the classroom, be it physical or virtual.” Is the gap closing? Deis versus the rest The Educational Research Centre has produced a series of reports over recent years examining the performance of Deis versus non-Deis schools. These are some of the findings: