The Springboks World Cup winner Damien de Allende has confirmed he is leaving Munster at the end of the season. The 30-year-old centre has also revealed he will not be joining Johann van Graan at Bath next season or any other club in Europe. “I’m not staying, but it hasn’t been confirmed where I’m going,” de Allende told the Irish media on Tuesday. “I’m not staying in Europe, so I’m definitely not going to Bath, I haven’t spoken to anyone at Bath. I will not be staying in Europe as of the end of the season, which is unfortunate, but I’m looking forward to ending the season on a high. “I really want to leave Munster with great memories I’ve made already, but some silverware as well.” The expectation has always been that de Allende would return to playing club rugby in Japan although his statement could hold out the possibility of him returning to his native South Africa ahead of their defence of the World Cup in France late next year. Wasps centre Malakai Fekitoa will join Munster next season on a two-year deal. De Allende has recently made a timely return to action in Munster’s games in South Africa after missing over two months with an abdominal injury and completed his second 80 minutes against Benetton last Friday as Munster enter a defining period of their season. They host Leinster at Thomond Park next Saturday (kick-off 7pm) prior to their Champions Cup last 16 two-legged tie with Exeter and then a trip to Ulster in the URC. He has played in five matches against Leinster since his arrival, all of them behind closed doors, making this his first experience of a home derby with their rivals in front of supporters. “Yeah, looking forward to it. We want to see a big sea of red, but I’m also excited to see the blue in the stadium as well. I haven’t experienced a full Thomond Park yet so I’m hoping it’ll be close to sold-out. “I’m looking forward to seeing the red and blue, I’ve seen it on TV a few times back home in my younger days. The atmosphere looked incredible. I know a lot of us play rugby because we love the sport, but I think for us players, the atmosphere also.” Leinster also remain the ultimate test for Munster in his view. “It’s quite tough, it’s quite challenging because it almost feels like a Test match. They have quite a few internationals and experience in the team. What they bring to the match, the intensity is higher, the physicality is similar as well, but it’s one game as a player you want to challenge yourself against. “They are one of the best teams in Europe in the past few years. Like I say all the time, you want to test yourself against the best players and the majority of the team are some of the best players in Ireland, that’s why they represent Ireland, and did quite well in the Six Nations. “A lot of the guys are looking forward to the challenge, and we’re excited to have the fans back at Thomond Park, and it’ll be an incredible atmosphere on Saturday.” Injury news Last Monday, the entire Munster squad were reunited for the first time since January 23rd following the return of their Irish Six Nations and Under-20 contingents to the high performance centre in Limerick. Joey Carbery, Andrew Conway, Dave Kilcoyne, Conor Murray and Peter O’Mahony could all be involved next Saturday. However, the knee injury Andrew Conway sustained against England leaves him as a short to medium-term absentee, with van Graan unwilling to speculate as to whether this will rule him out of Munster’s ensuing Champions Cup last 16 two-legged tie with Exeter. Furthermore, Tadhg Beirne sustained a low-grade thigh injury in the Triple Crown-sealing win over Scotland and is rehabilitating with the medical department. Jean Kleyn was removed as a precaution before the Benetton match on Friday with a leg strain and he will undergo a scan. Simon Zebo departed for a HIA against Benetton after his head bounced off the hard 4g surface and will undergo the return-to-play protocols this week. Mike Haley (knee) has progressed well with his initial rehabilitation while RG Snyman (knee), Jack Daly (ankle), Liam O’Connor (knee) and James French (knee) remain sidelined. Next Saturday’s fixture was originally scheduled to take place behind closed doors on St Stephen’s Day but was postponed due to an outbreak of Covid-19 in Leinster’s ranks and van Graan noted: “I think it’s the first time in five games that Munster versus Leinster are going to be in front of a home crowd so I’m really looking forward to the atmosphere at Thomond Park. Munster and Leinster games are always special so really looking forward to it.” Tickets sales are so far in excess of 18,000 and van Graan added: “I’m not sure that it will be a full house, but it’s great to be playing back in front of our home fans at Thomond Park. We’ve learned through Covid that rugby is not the same without support and we love playing at Thomond Park and it’s always a special occasion, not only for Munster but for Irish rugby when there’s interpros. “It just happens to be Leinster before we play the European games and then a big game against Ulster and then Cardiff at Musgrave Park, so it’s a magnificent block of games ahead. We’re pretty well set in both competitions. “It’s week 41 of our season and we’ve worked 40 weeks to put ourselves in this position,” said van Graan, whose team sits third in the overall URC table, eight points behind Leinster (who have played a game less) and three behind Ulster, and with Glasgow and Edinburgh just two and four points behind. “That’s what you’re working for, for weeks like this and the next four weeks to come.”