Are you a saver or a spender? Controversial … If you ask my wife, I’m a spender, but I like to think I’m a little savvier than that. I have a weird relationship with money, and generally the only things that get my attention when it comes to spending are my kids and new tech. In that order, I promise. Do you shop around for better value? No, I’m compulsive. I look for value first and if I know a certain product or company is going to be providing the best service or experience, I’m more than happy to spend extra for that. What has been your most extravagant purchase and how much did it cost? When 3D TVs first became a thing, my wife and I were looking for a new sofa. Unbeknown to my wife, I had also already decided that it was the perfect opportunity to come home with a brand new 60-inch 3D TV that cost about €3,000. Apart from cars and houses, that would be top of the list but I don’t even know if you can buy them any more. What purchase have you made that you consider the best value for money? Easy – it’s my wallet. I fell in love with a new style of wallet about 10 years ago, made by a company called Nomatic. It was a slim profile wallet that meant I could keep it in my front pocket, it looked cool, and it provided lots of function. It cost me €19 and is still standing to this day. How did you prefer to shop during the Covid-19 restrictions – online or local? I prefer to shop local when it comes to day-to-day things. I think it’s important that we support the towns and communities we live in. When it comes to my inclination for technology, that is nearly exclusively online, and tends to lean towards only one or two brands. Do you haggle over prices? If it’s a service, never. I think it’s important to respect the value people put on their expertise and experience. When it comes to other things, such as bigger items from a store or a new car, I haggle 100 per cent. I am more than happy to ask the salesperson about the best deal they can do for me. How has the Covid-19 crisis changed your spending habits? I use Amazon a great deal more than I did before. When it comes to particular items, I’ve invested in desk and home office supplies more than I even wish to imagine. Do you invest in shares? The last few years have been focused on investing in my family, home and getting the “today” things right. I know for sure that over the next few years it’s something I want to start getting involved in. Cash or card? Exclusively card. I actually can’t remember the last time I touched cash. The worst part is that, with the contactless maximum spend going up, I hardly ever remember my pin code, and my phone has become my card. What was the last thing you bought and was it good value for money? Recently, we went out and bought the final big components for our new kitchen. They are yet to be tried and tested, however, so their value is yet to be seen. Have you ever successfully saved up for a relatively big purchase? Yes, several times. The most recent being our kitchen refurbishment. We decided we didn’t want to go down the finance route to get it sorted, so the focus over the past year has been getting the finance together ourselves. Have you ever lost money? Just once. About six years ago, I was an early adopter of a new social media app. I put a very small amount of money forward initially to support the app development and growth. Unfortunately, within about six months it flopped. Are you a gambler and, if so, have you ever had a big win? I have never gambled or even played the lottery. I don’t like the concept of putting what I have at risk to get more, it just seems illogical to me. I like to be grateful for what I do have, and any risk I want to take should be calculated and not left to chance. Is money important to you? What’s important to me is that I can provide for my family and that my kids have opportunities and experiences in life. Money is the key that can help you unlock those doors, so I guess it’s two-sided. On one hand, it’s obviously yes, but on the other, I tend not to think too much about it. How much money do you have on you now? In cash? Not a single penny. It’s all digital.