Cork City 1-2 Sligo Rovers Sligo got their first ever WNL goal and win in a hard-fought victory at Turner’s Cross. The game was just passed the hour mark when Gemma McGuinness made history by scoring the first league goal for Sligo, and the lead was doubled by Emma Doherty who made a huge impact in the game. Nadine Seward got one back for Cork, but it was a famous win for Sligo Rovers highlighted by a super performance from Kristen Sample. Bohemians 0-3 Wexford Youths The game will be remembered for yet another super strike by Ireland’s young sensation Ellen Molloy. The youngster opened the scoring with a thunderbolt from just inside the attacking half early in the game. Ciara Rossiter doubled the lead by scoring directly from a corner. Wexford controlled the game and the ever reliable Kylie Murphy tapped in a third midway through the second half. Peamount United 5-1 Treaty United Another prolific evening from Pamount who end the week two points clear at the top of the table. They started things early with goals from Aine O’Gorman, Stephanie Roche, and Jetta Berrill. Sadbh Doyle added another late in the half to seal the win. Things slowed down in the second half with Treaty finding themselves mostly defending. A bright spark for the Limerick side was Emma Costello, who got one back for Treaty with a finish in the top corner. Peamount’s quality and experience showed, Jetta Berrill added a 5th to put a gloss on the scoreline. Galway WFC 1-1 DLR Waves It was a largely even game at Eamonn Deacy Park with a draw ultimately a fair result. DLR Waves had the better chances in the first half and would take the lead coming up to the break. Avril Brierley found Sarah McKevitt in the box who finished tidily to add a goal to her 4 assists so far this season. The game was unfortunately interrupted as Savannah McCarthy had to be stretchered off. Galway would find an equalizer in injury time in the first half. A lovely bit of skill from Aoibheann Costelloe led to Lynsey McKey sending a cross into the Waves box where Aoife Thompson headed home. The second half was back and forth with both sides having chances. Galway came close to snatching a winner in the 84th minute with a goal mouth scramble, but to no avail. Athlone Town 0-2 Shelbourne Shelbourne’s know-how showed as they battled past a resilient Athlone Town. The Reds found a way through on the 28th minute with some direct attacking play which ended with Jess Ziu - in the first game since news of her move to West Ham came through - squaring the ball to Noelle Murray who tapped in. Athlone held out well in the second half and had a few chances on the counter-attack, but it was Shelbourne who spent most of the game on top. Keeva Keenan scored late on to seal the win.