Airport operator DAA has been given the green light for tolled drop-off and pick-up zones at Dublin Airport. Fingal County Council granted planning permission for the necessary infrastructure and road changes for the zones at terminals one and two. However, the operator said a free drop-off zone would still be available at the express red long-term car park. “As part of our sustainability agenda, the new system aims to reduce car journeys to and from the airport and to encourage passengers to make greater use of public transport, ” a spokesman said. “Commercial funds raised by the new system will be ringfenced for sustainability initiatives at the airport, including a proposed solar farm, the conversion of our car park and staff shuttle bus fleet from diesel to low-emission vehicles and the installation of more electric vehicle charging points.” The spokesman said that the new system would not be in place for the upcoming summer season and construction would take place in the second half of 2022. The operation of the paid drop-off and pick-up zone will be based on automated number plate recognition (ANPR) cameras with plates read at entry and exit and the charge dictated by the amount of time spent by the driver in the drop-off zone. Planning consultants for the airport operator said that the scheme would result in more efficient access at terminals one and two. Coakley O’Neill Town Planning said the proposals would result in a more co-ordinated, controlled and efficient management of passenger drop off and pick up. The report by the consultants said that the proposed development would not have an adverse effect on parking, bus operations, pedestrians or cyclists. The report went on to say that the proposed development would contribute towards improved efficiency in the movement of traffic. The grant of permission comes 13 months after Fingal County Council initially refused planning permission to a previous drop-off proposal. In the revised scheme, the airport operator addressed the reasons for the first refusal, which included the loss of long-term car parking.