Immunology expert Prof Luke O’Neill has called for Covid testing facilities to be “ramped up” for the next four to six weeks as a new wave of the coronavirus hits the country. It comes as the Irish Nurses and Midwives Organisation (INMO) has said mandatory mask-wearing should be reintroduced in indoor settings. Prof O’Neill said a new variant called BA2 was 30 per cent more infectious than Omicron, which was 70 per cent more transmissible than the previous variant. The incubation time for BA2 is also shorter, he told RTÉ radio’s Today with Claire Byrne show, but the high vaccination rates in Ireland have meant there is greater protection, “otherwise the ICUs would be full”. Prof O’Neill said Denmark had already experienced the BA2 variant and it was likely the current wave in Ireland would peak in early April and then drop. But he warned that everybody should be “triple vaxxed” and people who are vulnerable or over the age of 60 should get a fourth shot. He said the 700,000 people who had received their first two vaccines and then got Covid, meaning they weren’t able to get a booster, should get their third shot now. This would give them even better protection and “a durable response”, he added. Prof O’Neill said there have been major developments in the area of vaccines. One, which was made in Scotland, could work against any strain while another was an intranasal vaccine which was easy to administer. There were 137 vaccines still in development, he added, which will give better protection. Hospital pressure The increase in Covid cases is putting pressure on hospitals and creating unsafe situations for patients, general secretary of the INMO Phil Ní Sheaghdha said. “The numbers speak for themselves,” she told RTÉ radio’s Morning Ireland. Hospitals were always under pressure after a bank holiday weekend, she said, and combined with high levels of Covid-19 in the community there was a “very unsafe situation”. The “tremendous pressure” to find space for patients was leading to decisions being made that were “simply unsafe”, she added. Although recent research indicated that two-thirds of the population were voluntarily complying with mask-wearing, she said that figure needed to be higher as hospitals did not have the capacity for any increase in attendances. On Monday there were 570 people on trolleys, the equivalent of one full acute hospital, said Ms Ní­ Sheaghdha. The Health Service Executive will have to act, she said.“We have to look at anything that will assist [in lowering numbers].” Elective care could not continue when there was no capacity, she added. Hospital-acquired Covid infections had rapidly increased recently from 129 to 183 cases, said Ms Ní­ Sheaghdha. Hospitals were becoming “reservoirs” for Covid which was leading to cross-infection. Prof O’Neill echoed the INMO’s call, saying mandatory mask-wearing on public transport and in any indoor situation should return. He had travelled on the Dart on Monday, and said: “My heart sank when I saw so many not wearing masks.” Anything that can be done to reduce pressure on the health system should be done, he said. The good news was that summer was coming and the current wave would pass, he said, however, there remained a risk of a more serious variant which could cause more serious illnesses. “We should prepare. Preparation is key. There will be another outbreak next winter.”