Dún Laoghaire-Rathdown County Council has recommended that plans for a new €316 million build-to-rent scheme for Dundrum be refused on a number of grounds. In a 78-page planning report lodged with An Bord Pleanála, the council planners have recommended that planning permission be refused on six separate grounds. The fast-track strategic housing development scheme before the appeals board comprises 531 build-to-rent units made up of 28 studios, 297 one-bed units, 197 two-bed units and nine three-bedroom units. The amenities for residents include an outdoor cinema, a yoga studio, a chef’s kitchen, a rooftop garden allotment and pet-washing facilities. The council said the 10-storey scheme would create a visually dominant and overbearing form of development when viewed from a number of vantage points and significantly injure the residential and visual amenities of the area. The council refusal recommendation follows more than 80 parties objecting to the plans by 1 Wyckham Land Ltd for the build-to-rent apartments across five apartment blocks at Marmalade Lane, Gort Muire, Dundrum, Dublin 16. One of those to object, the Balally Residents’ Association, contends that the scheme would have a negative impact on the value of all homes in the surrounding area. Depreciate properties The council also recommended that planning permission be refused as the scheme would depreciate the values of properties of the nearby Parkvale. The local authority said the proposed development would result in a cramped building form and a substandard level of residential amenity for future occupants in terms of overshadowing and poor visual amenity. It also cited the potential for car-parking overspill on surrounding residential roads. The council also recommended refusal after concluding that the scheme would have a detrimental impact on the setting and amenity of the protected structure, the Gort Mhuire Centre. In January last year, the developer secured planning permission for 466 build-to-rent units in apartment blocks rising to nine storeys at the same site, with the new proposal having an additional 65 units. A report lodged with the scheme describes the proposal as an “exemplar” build-to-rent development.