With its captivating coastlines and mountains, land activities and sea adventures, friendly locals and fabulous food, the Turkish Riviera is a destination for those hungry for adventure. A blue cruise on a traditional gulet - an elegant wooden vessel with sails and a motor - is a once in a lifetime way to experience the Turkish Riviera on the shimmering Mediterranean coast. The Turkish Riviera is a paradise of secluded coves and ancient cities, remarkable ruins and idyllic islands. It's a compelling destination for those with a sense of adventure who want to stretch their sea legs. On a blue cruise, you can get off the beaten track, dive right into the warm turquoise waters and sail by legendary historical sites and archaeological wonders. You can treat your taste buds to a bounty of regional cuisine, and sleep out under a blanket of stars or cosy up in your luxurious cabin. With a sailing holiday, you are at the helm of your trip. Turquoise Coast The brilliant blue hues of the Turkish Riviera have earned it the nickname the Turquoise Coast. Stretching more than 1,500 km along southwestern Turkey - roughly from Çeşme to Antalya - it is here where the sparkling Aegean and Mediterranean seas meet. This coastline is a cultural trove of archaeological sites and natural wonders, many of which are only accessible from the water. The area is also the birthplace and home of the blue voyage coastal cruises - storied sailing holidays aboard a traditional gulet wooden boat. Traditional gulets Beautiful wooden sailing boats, gulets were traditionally built along the Turkish coast. Originally, they were used by fishermen and sponge divers, but today they are used as a unique way of exploring the glittering coastline. Decked out with everything from en suite cabins to dining areas, sun loungers and hot tubs, these classic boats have been refined for leisure and pleasure. Apart from the unique way of travelling, what makes sailing on one so special is its bespoke nature. Gulets come in a wide range of sizes and can sleep from six to 20 guests. You can charter one yourself or join a group. Set sail for a week on a leisurely voyage or spend a couple of days cruising a few coves. The choice is yours, and so too is the itinerary which you can design - or let the captain set the course. But no matter what you choose, endless adventures await. The Turquoise Coast is where the Taurus Mountains tumble down and kiss the sea - the pine and cedar forests perfuming the salty air. The breathtaking coastline is adorned with secluded coves and beaches with talcum-soft sand lapped by the warm, pristine water - paradisiacal places to enjoy swimming, snorkeling or sunbathing. On a blue cruise, you reach places that are remote and seem untouched, making you feel like an intrepid explorer. As the gulet peacefully drifts along, you become part of the scenery and at one with nature. It’s an incredibly immersive way of travelling. Idyllic islands and marinas Island hopping is one of the great pleasures of sailing along the Turkish Riviera. There are just so many pretty places to moor up and check out with each island having its own charm and character. Enjoy leisurely lunches and sunset dinners along the harbours and marinas. Turkey is the world’s third Blue Flag-awarded beach destination with a huge 519 beaches with the designation, and it also boasts 22 marinas with Blue Flag awards. Mingle with the locals whilst shopping for handmade souvenirs in the souks and all manner of bargains at the bazaars. Wander the streets and take in the delightful sights, sounds and smells of Mediterranean island-life. You can also hike the hills, roam the national parks, soak in the hot springs and lather up in a natural mud bath. Well, if it was good enough for Cleopatra … Impressive archeology Speaking of the Egyptian Queen, you can also visit the remains of Cleopatra’s baths. In fact, along the Turquoise Coast, you’ll find the densest concentration of ancient remains in the world including two of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World: Halicarnassus in Bodrum and Ephesus in İzmir. You can also visit necropolises with Lycian sarcophagi, secluded ruins of temples and basilicas and numerous other ancient sites overflowing with half-forgotten ruins. Without even leaving the comfort of the gulet, you can see spectacular 4th-century Lycian rock tombs that are cut right into the cliffs. On a Blue Voyage cruise, history surrounds you and astounds you at every opportunity. Delicious cuisine  From fine dining to authentic street food, you are spoiled for choice in this delicious destination. Turkey’s Turquoise Coast is renowned for its abundance of freshly grown produce and bounty of seafood. To experience the region’s delicacies, tuck into typical Aegean mezes laden with local cheeses, meats, vegetables, seafood, olives, and almonds. Pair with wine from the nearby vineyards, a Turkish satsuma cocktail or freshly squeezed pomegranate and orange juice. As you sail, breakfast on board your gulet is a typical Turkish repast of eggs, tomato, cucumber, cheese and bread and spreads. Those with a sweet tooth are well satisfied here too with fragrant Bodrum mandarins bought at the local food markets, or try the sticky, syrup-soaked fritters called lokma. For a toothsome snack, don’t miss out on homemade jam or cedar honey slathered on freshly baked bread washed down with traditional black tea, served in delicate tulip-shaped glasses. For more information please visit gobluevoyageturkiye.com