As a home-investment opportunity the potential at 55 Haddington Road is clear. The handsome end-of-terrace, three-storey period house has long been divided in two. There’s a self-contained two-bedroom apartment at garden level, leaving the two storeys above as a home, also with two bedrooms (one en suite) but with a grander feel and more period features. Both units have their own outdoor space to the rear, which faces south. Haddington Road was built in sections, mostly in the 19th century, with differing house styles: the five houses in this terrace are notable for their decorative entrances with attractive stained-glass fanlights and side lights. At one end of the terrace is the road’s landmark church, at the other where number 55 is located is a restaurant built on decades ago. In all there is 206sq m (2,215sq ft) of space. In a plan that followed its angular site the property was extended to the rear at both garden level, to give the self-contained flat those two bedrooms, and at the hall floor level to make space for a good-sized contemporary eat-in kitchen. The property came to the market in 2004 (with an ambitious price tag of €1.8 million) having been renovated for sale and it was being presented as a turnkey proposition complete with furniture and fittings freshly chosen by an interior designer. The makeover included new kitchens, timber sash windows and flooring and in the main part of the house the interconnecting livingroom-cum-diningroom at hall floor level had been upgraded to include spotlighting, a period-style fireplace, and the shutters on the windows were restored. It didn’t sell at that price then; instead it was taken off the market and rented, selling for a little under €1 million nearly 10 years later as an investment property. Once again it is being presented very smartly with rooms furnished to show off their potential, though this time the furniture is not included in the sale. If a home with income potential is not on the minds of buyers they could consider bringing back the lot into a single home by reincorporating the garden level with the rest of the house, though that would require considerable work. For a multigenerational family that requires two units, it would work as is, although the Ber of E1 will likely prompt some energy improvements. Parking is on street. Number 55 Haddington Road is being sold by Knight Frank, asking €1.2million.