There’s a lot of talk about the Great Resignation, but what can be done to tackle it? Firstly, we must look at what is driving staff to leave. A recent multi-region McKinsey survey of managers and workers revealed that there is a disconnect between what employers believe their staff desire, and what they truly desire. Management seem to believe that their employees’ main concerns include increased pay, remote working options, as well as development opportunities. However, workers have expressed that their main desires consist of being valued, to be given a sense of purpose, flexible working options, and interestingly, to work alongside caring and trusting colleagues. Easy, right? We are living in a virtual world more often than ever before, so implementing a strategy to reconnect colleagues and nurture relationships can prove somewhat difficult. While technology allows us to connect easily with others, it tends to drive disconnection at a human level. Tech fatigue can be a real issue, with increased screentime, restrictions on reading nonverbal cues, continuous wifi issues and those pesky mute buttons; it’s no wonder employees can be left feeling drained by the end of the workday. Furthermore, an annual employee survey from global recruiter Robert Walters, revealed that two out of three Irish professionals have said that they are “highly likely” to leave their job this year due to a lack of face time with leaders within their organisation. And on average, line managers only checked in with their employees once per week, leaving workers feeling isolated and disconnected. This is not to say that working remotely doesn’t have its benefits. Remote working provides workers with far more flexibility in their day and cuts out any commute, meaning employees can spend more time doing the things they enjoy, as well as spending more time with loved ones. However, for some, remote working can also lead to the feeling of loneliness. Whilst many employees live with their families, partners, or housemates, there are also many who are living alone, and who may be reliant on their day job to provide some form of human connection during the week. This is also particularly relevant to new hires looking to make connections with their teammates but find it a challenge to do so over Zoom. Creating a work environment where staff can come together and bond will only help to build employee loyalty and increase employee happiness, thus, improving retention. A recent Microsoft survey found that post-pandemic, over 70% of employees want more flexible remote options, yet 65% crave more in-person time with their teams. It’s clear that the pandemic has changed how we work forever; employees have had a taste of remote working and don’t want to let it go, however, on the other hand, we can see the desire for human connection. So, what are employers to do? Ireland’s leading flexible workspace provider, Iconic Offices, has noticed more clients moving to flexible working models, and an influx of clients introducing a hybrid work model for their businesses. This means their staff work part of their week in the office and the other part remotely, giving them the best of both worlds. Iconic’s solution specialists help businesses create a bespoke plan adaptable to their needs, whether that’s a full-time office, a hybrid solution, or a private coworking hub. No need for the client to have to worry about the how and where, Iconic’s team can guide and consult from the first call to move in. With each one of Iconic Offices’ unique flexible workspaces, they are supporting business growth, taking the hassle out of the day-to-day of the office and offering clients benefits to help attract and retain talent. While they are known for their design of inspirational workspaces, an aspect that appeals to employees, the design goes far beyond décor and aesthetics to include IT, ergonomics, and facilities, with a strong focus on providing premium service and support. Furthermore, Iconic will assist their clients with incorporating their hybrid business model to help make the process run as smoothly as possible. So, when talent attraction and retention is the core of any business in order to thrive and grow, the central cultural home and hub the business operates from makes all the difference. Connecting in person and having the all-important face-to-face time, in person, helps improve communication, establish trust, and support connection to both the company and the people we work with. Getting back to the office, whether full-time or a hybrid, will help your staff reconnect, improve relationships between line managers and employees, as well as build a solid company culture, all to help with the end goal, improving staff retention. Find out more about Iconic’s flexible workspace solutions - iconicoffices.ie