Laois 1-20 Antrim 1-19 A Cha Dwyer point in the third minute of injury-time was the crucial score for Laois as they beat Antrim in a thrilling clash in Portlaoise to preserve their Division One status for another year. The game was a de facto relegation semi-final, with the winner safe and the loser into a relegation decider. And it was the home side that came out on top, despite playing almost 50 minutes of the game with only 14 men. Laois led for most of the game but fell behind in the 69th minute when Paddy Burke nudged the visitors ahead. However, a free from PJ Scully drew Laois level and then they won it through a wonderful score from Dwyer. Laois hurled with the breeze in the first half but it was Antrim who scored three of the first four points via Neil McManus, Conal Cunning and Michael Bradley. Laois announced their arrival in the third minute when Paddy Purcell brilliantly made his way up the wing before burying the ball into the net. It was tit-for-tat after that with the sides exchanging points but Laois led 1-6 to 0-7 after 22 minutes when they were reduced to 14 men. Jack Kelly was fouled on the Antrim 45 but then wildly pulled on David Kearney with his hurl in front of the linesman to earn a straight red. Nevertheless, Laois responded well and outscored Antrim from there to half-time to lead 1-11 to 0-8. Antrim came roaring back at Laois when play resumed and scored the first three points of the second half. Laois kept their noses in front with Stephen Maher flawless on frees and every time Antrim came at them, they kicked on again. A goal from Neil McManus looked to be a big score for Antrim and they took the lead as the game entered the 70th minute. But Laois had a response. Antrim must now face Offaly or Limerick in the relegation decider. LAOIS: E Rowland (0-1, free); D Conway, P Delaney, S Downey; J Kelly, L O’Connell, R Mullaney; J Keyes (0-2), F C-Fennell; S Maher (0-8, four frees, two 65s), C Dwyer (0-4), P Purcell (1-1); R King, W Dunphy (0-2), M Dowling. Subs: PJ Scully (0-2, one free, 1 s/l) for Dowling (50 mins), A Corby for King (55), S Bergin for Maher (70), C Comerford for Dunphy (73). ANTRIM: R Elliott; D Kearney (0-1), G Walsh (0-1), S Rooney; P Burke (0-2), E Campbell (0-1), R McGarry; D McKernan, M Bradley (0-2); C Cunning (0-2), K Molloy, D Nugent; S Elliott (0-1), N McManus (1-7, seven frees), C Clarke (0-2). Subs: J McNaughton for Nugent and C McCann for Elliott (both h-t), C Johnston for Kearney (58 mins), E O’Neill for Molloy (61), R McCambridge for Bradley (68). Referee: S Hynes (Galway).