Shamrock Rovers 1 Bohemians 0 The differences between Shamrock Rovers and Bohemians are too many to mention but in the present tense it comes down to options. Stephen Bradley has a multitude of them whenever he glances at the Rovers bench while Bohs boss Keith Long must play the cards he is dealt. Bradley could hold a 1-nil lead, thanks to Rory Gaffney’s first goal of the season, by ruthlessly chasing a second via the fresh legs of Richie Towell, Danny Mandroiu and Barry Cotter - three players, recently returned from the English leagues, who would command starting berths at any other Irish club. That’s the real difference between these ancient rivals. Despite this being a highly competitive affair, the gap feels like a chasm. The giant Bohs banner, screaming ‘Death to Every Foe and Traitor,’ seemed harsh until we realised the lyric from The Rising of the Moon was so over the top that it could only be unfurled on this night. And what a helter-skelter night it was (how and why the state-funded broadcaster continues to shield this Dublin derby from a larger audience perplexed and angered a full house of 7,500). The unfurling was quickly followed by an abusive chant aimed at Ireland under-21 fullback Andy Lyons, who switched colours this past winter to become a full-time professional with Shamrock Rovers. Bohs, for the uninitiated, remain a sustainable yet semi-pro operation. Their thousand-strong travelling support were having none of it, invoking the Irish ballet that recounts Wolf Tone’s 1798 rebellion against British rule. Such inventiveness, and a healthy amount of spite between the fans, can only translate into entertainment at this non-televised event on a weekend when couch surfers will gorge on five live GAA matches and a heap of rugby. The counter-argument to Friday night football - that a profitable League of Ireland audience does not exist - no longer carries much weight as all ages and genders filled the Tallaght ground. Perhaps viewing figures are not telling the full story. Anyway, it took Rovers 25 minutes to put Bohs in their pocket when Ronan Finn fed Gaffney. The striker could have bagged a hat-trick by the turn but a dinked shot drifted wide before James Talbot expertly palmed his point blank header onto the post. In control Rovers were in no mood to let Bohs muscle into them like St Patrick’s Athletic did last Friday at Richmond Park. But the visitors had their chances. Kris Twardek in particular. Just before half-time, Dawson Devoy’s pass put the rangy Canadian winger goal-side of Lee Grace but his effort to hoodwink referee Rob Hennessy into a penalty came to nothing. Neither dive nor foul, the ref seemed perfectly positioned to wave play on. Devoy was almost as quiet as Jack Byrne, which is not ideal with Stephen Kenny naming a Republic of Ireland squad next week for March friendlies against Belgium and Lithuania, but the creative hub of each team showed flashes of their rare gifts. Byrne slashed a shot wide of Talbot’s goal on the hour mark. Towell replaced him long before the finish. Rovers always looked in control. Perhaps that’s because Bohs lacked a goal threat now that Georgie Kelly has departed and Promise Omochere is injured. Ryan Cassidy eventually made way for a fit again Liam Burt but the Scottish winger was unable to make an impact at centre forward. Any hope of Bohs stifling the Hoops seemed to dissipate when Bradley unleashed Cotter and Mandroiu for the final 20 minutes. Cotter provided the defensive heroics when blocking another chance for Twardek to equalize on 76 minutes and Mandroiu really should have put the result beyond any doubt but his snap shot rolled wide after Aaron Greene’s late effort was stopped by Talbot. Shamrock Rovers: Mannus; Hoare, Lopes, Grace; O’Neill, Watts, Finn (capt), Lyons; Burke, Byrne; Gaffney. Subs: Green for Gaffney (67) Cotter for Finn, Mandroiu for Burke (both 70), Towell for Byrne (77). Bohemians: Talbot; Feely, Kelly, Horton, Wilson (capt); Devoy, Coote, Flores; Twardek, Cassidy, Mallon. Subs: Burt for Cassidy (64), Doherty for Flores (77), Mullins for Mallon (82). Referee: Rob Hennessy.