Paul McCartney, Kendrick Lamar and Olivia Rodrigo have been announced as among the stars performing at this summer’s Glastonbury festival. Out of the 89 names announced so far, 48 are women or acts that include female artists, meeting festival co-organiser Emily Eavis’s previously stated intention for Glastonbury to achieve gender parity on its bill. “Our future has to be 50/50,” she told the BBC in 2020. The festival, which was cancelled for the last two years, makes its return with McCartney as Saturday night headliner – his second time atop the Pyramid stage, having performed in 2004 – and Pulitzer prize-winning rapper Lamar, who will make his debut at the festival to close the Pyramid Stage on the Sunday night. It had already been announced that Billie Eilish will make her second appearance at Worthy Farm in Somerset on the Pyramid stage, along with Diana Ross, who will be following in the footsteps of fellow veteran superstars including Dolly Parton, Lionel Richie and James Brown in the Sunday “teatime legend” slot. Eilish is among a strong pop presence at the festival, with Rodrigo, Doja Cat, Megan Thee Stallion, Charli XCX and Caroline Polachek all appearing. The festival will also feature debut sets from Herbie Hancock, Phoebe Bridgers, Sam Fender, Turnstile, TLC, Wet Leg and Yves Tumor. Other acts announced include Fontaines DC, Kacey Musgraves, Noel Gallagher’s High Flying Birds, Pet Shop Boys, Foals, Haim, Lorde and Robert Plant, who will appear alongside Alison Krauss. The names announced are the first shortlist of acts for this year’s festival, which takes place on June 22nd-26th. The full lineup is expected to be published in May. McCartney and Lamar were among the headline acts for the cancelled festival in 2020, which would have been its 50th anniversary year. Taylor Swift was also due to headline in 2020, but thus far does not appear to be performing this year. Prior to the announcement, McCartney teased the news on Twitter in the form of a Wordle clue. He used six squares rather than the traditional five, presumably to hint at the word “Glasto” – and not “Mexico”, to the chagrin of hopeful South American fans. He gave the game the number 121 and wrote 25/6 in the field that usually indicates how many attempts it took for the player to correctly guess the word to reveal the date of his performance: When he tweeted the clue, on February 24th, it was 121 days until 25 June, which he is due to play. This year’s Glastonbury will act as a belated birthday celebration for McCartney, who turns 80 on June 18th, making him the oldest ever headliner at the festival. By contrast, the Friday night headliner Eilish will be the festival’s youngest ever solo headliner. Festival organiser Emily Eavis said: “It really is so exciting to be back. And it feels like we all need it. Everywhere I go, people tell me how much they’re looking forward to the festival’s return and how they’ve all been waiting for it. This will be our first Glastonbury for three years. It’s the biggest buildup we’ve ever had!” This year’s Glastonbury lineup so far Billie Eilish Paul McCartney Kendrick Lamar Diana Ross Amyl and the Sniffers Angelique Kidjo Arlo Parks The Avalanches Beabadoobee Bicep Big Thief Black Midi Blossoms Bonobo Burna Boy Caribou Caroline Polachek Cate Le Bon Celeste Charli XCX Clairo Confidence Man Courtney Barnett Crowded House Declan McKenna Doja Cat Dry Cleaning Easy Life Elbow Emma-Jean Thackray First Aid Kit Foals Fontaines DC Four Tet Gabriels Ghetts Girl in Red Glass Animals Greentea Peng Griff Haim Herbie Hancock Holly Humberstone Idles Inhaler Jarv Is… Jessie Ware The Jesus and Mary Chain Joy Crookes Kacey Musgraves Khruangbin Koffee Leon Bridges Lianne La Havas Little Simz Lorde Megan Thee Stallion Metronomy Mitski Nightmares on Wax Noel Gallagher’s High Flying Birds Nubya Garcia Olivia Rodrigo Pet Shop Boys Phoebe Bridgers Primal Scream Robert Plant and Alison Krauss Róisín Murphy Rufus Wainwright Sam Fender Sampa the Great Seun Kuti and Egypt 80 Self Esteem Sigrid Skunk Anansie Sleaford Mods Snarky Puppy Squid St Vincent Supergrass Tems TLC Turnstile Warmduscher The Waterboys Wet Leg Wolf Alice Years and Years Yves Tumor