All of the mortgages registered against aircraft worth hundreds of millions of euro by a Russian-owned leasing company based in Dublin were settled on the day Ukraine was invaded, company filings show. Colm Keena has the details. Irish businesses are seeking to reduce their dependency on the UK market amid concerns about the imposition of further Brexit-related checks or red-tape measures, according to Grant Thornton Ireland’s latest international business report, writes Eoin Burke-Kennedy. A new fund offering grants of up to €300,000 to Irish companies, NGOs and researchers working on climate issues in developing countries has been announced by the Government. Kevin O’Sullivan reports. More than a third of women (40 per cent) considered quitting their job in the last 12 months, “citing burn out and the pressures of family life”, according to a survey by recruitment site Indeed, reports Eoin Burke-Kennedy Gayle Killilea, ex-wife of bankrupt property mogul Sean Dunne, met a Friday deadline to provide assets securing the €19.5 million judgment against the couple in their 2019 US civil trial, according to a lawyer for the bankruptcy trustee. Christopher Hoffman reports. Professional services firm Deloitte has committed €530,000 in funding to Dublin City University’s centre for climate and society, a think tank devoted to research on the climate issue. Eoin Burke-Kennedy reports. In his weekly column Eoin Burke-Kennedy wonders where Leo Varadkar is going with his promise to the country’s dairy farmers that there will be no limits placed on production. Pilita Clark reckons employers will have a hard time convincing employees that braving the daily commute is a worthwhile price to pay for returning to the office. In our Opinion slot, Joe Cunningham, general secretary of Siptu argues that we need a flexible pension age, allowing people to work beyond the pension age if they wish while allowing people with long contribution records to retire early. Dominic Coyle answers a reader’s question on how her 95-year-old mother’s house can be sold and the implication of this as she is being take care of under the Fair Deal scheme. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has thrown global markets into turmoil and seen a spike in the price of oil and gas. Cliff Taylor explains on our Inside Business podcast what impact the conflict will have on the global economy and how it will be felt in Ireland. Presenter Ciarán Hancock is also joined in this episode by Simon Carswell, who outlines how EU sanctions on Russia are causing problems for aircraft lessors based in Ireland. In the second part of the show: Veteran entrepreneur and whiskey maker John Teeling on how exposed the Irish whiskey sector is to the sanctions on Russia. Stay up to date with all our business news: sign up to our business news alerts and our Business Today daily email news digest.