Can you really help your home function better in the time it takes to boil a kettle? Why of course you can. These small moves can go a long way. Rinse your dishwasher filter: Weekly will do. Doing this is vital to ensure you don’t pay easily avoidable call out charges and your dishwasher works as she should during each wash. You don’t want last week’s dinner all over your wine glasses do you? Check your cooker hood grease filter: If she’s washable, get to it with some warm soapy water. If she’s disposable pop it on your shopping list. Don’t stop at the grease filter: Get to know if your cooker hood is circulating (sending the air back to you after cleaning it) or indeed extractor (sending it outside). If she is the former, there will be a carbon filter also inside – this is what removes the food odours from the air before it comes back in your room. When was that last changed? Head to the fridge: See that hole on the back wall, just above the bottom shelf? That’s a drain and needs to be wiped down regularly to avoid blocking and water gathering under the drawers. Clean your sink drain: Throw two cups of bicarb down your drain, then a cup of vinegar and pop in the plug. The fizzing reaction here will help loosen anything stuck to the pipes that could cause bad odours or blockages later. Finish off with some recently boiled water to send it all on its way. Check for leaks: Speaking of the sink, check underneath to make sure there are no leaks. A common household issue that can often go unnoticed. Tighten up the fittings if you think the pipes are loose and dripping. Test: your smoke alarm, test your carbon monoxide alarm. Get cleaning: Take a dry microfibre cloth and wipe down the rubber seals of your fridge and dishwasher door. These attract a lot of airborne dirt naturally due to their composition. Unscrew your shower head: and throw it into a bowl of water and vinegar. Leave overnight to dissolve the limescale clogging her up and you’ll have a more powerful shower in the morning. Stunning Find your stopcock: A vital move you’ll thank yourself for, if there is ever a need to use it. Clean your washing machine filter: Most people don’t realise they have one. Your manual will tell you how. Stain removal: Grab that top with the grease stain that didn’t wash out, the one that you won’t part with. Take some washing up liquid and rub into it then wash as normal. Divine.