The regulations removing Covid requirements for passengers arriving into the State have been removed, effective from Sunday. The Government made the move quickly to reduce obstacles for Ukrainians fleeing the war who are expected to arrive into the State in the coming days and weeks. The Statutory Intrument signed by Stephen Donnelly means arrivals will no longer be required to show proof of vaccination, recovery or a negative PCR test upon arrival nor will they be required to fill out passenger locator forms . Mr Donnelly said he had signed the regulations which were the “last remaining Covid regs”. He described it was “another step forward in our Covid efforts”. The Department of Health said the current epidemiological situation was “broadly positive” . With high levels of vaccine uptake and more information on Omicron variant the changes were possible. The change impacts passengers travelling into Ireland but Covid certificates and testing may still be required for outbound passengers arriving into other countries . The Department of Health said a Covid certificate could continue to be used as evidence of vaccination, booster vaccination, recovery , or proof of a negative Covid-19 test and advised people travelling abroad from Ireland to check requirements for destination countires at reopen.europa.eu/en. A total of 621 people fleeing the war in Ukraine have arrived in Ireland as of Friday, according to the Department of Foreign Affairs. If the war continues to escalate and continues into the medium term, Ireland will be expected to host about 2 per cent of all refugees who have been forced to leave their home country. On that basis, the Government has begun scenario planning based on a minimum of 20,000 Ukrainian refugees arriving in Ireland. Last night Taoiseach Micheál Martin said the Government is discussing opening an online portal or register where people can pledge how they can help the new arrivals, whether this is through providing accommodation or other skills,. Any Ukrainian people arriving in Ireland will need support, especially young children who will attend Irish schools, according to Mr Martin. “This will be challenging. The first wave of those coming into Ireland are meeting friends and staying with friends.” This will result in the biggest displacement of people on the European continent since the second World War, he added, and Irish people who want to help should make cash donations to the Irish Red Cross. He was speaking on the Late Late show where more than €3 million was raised for the charity. The Government donated €10 million last week to United Nations organisations at the front line and another €10 million will be donated this week, said the Taoiseach. Speaking on Friday afternoon, Minister for Higher Education Simon Harris said he would not be surprised if the figure coming in would easily exceed 1,000 by next week. Government sources said it was not expected that a large number of refugees would arrive in Ireland in the coming weeks and the figure of 600 fell within expectations. There are an estimated 4,000 Ukrainian-born people living in Ireland at present and, in the initial stages, Ukrainian refugees arriving into Ireland will go to relatives. A source said virtually all of the 621 people who have arrived have support networks of family and friends in Ireland and have not sought any help from the State so far.