Seven weeks ago Jack O’Connor appeared somewhat befuddled by the fact Kildare had pulled them back to draw their opening game of the Allianz Football League. One reason, suggested the Kerry manager, was that he was still short several first-choice players. Fast forward to last Sunday, and in holding off the stern challenge of Armagh at the Athletic Grounds, Kerry guaranteed their place in the Division One final with a game to spare (the visit of All-Ireland champions Tyrone to Killarney this weekend). Getting most of those first-choice players back on board has clearly made a telling difference. Among the most conspicuous of those is Diarmuid O’Connor and Jack Barry at midfield, the Tralee pair missing that opening game in Newbridge as they were still involved with their club Na Gaeil in the All-Ireland Intermediate Championship. They lost the semi-final to Steelstown Brian Óg’s of Derry that same weekend, 2-6 to 0-7, and might well have taken a breather in the aftermath. Instead, both O’Connor and Barry volunteered themselves for the round two clash against Dublin the following weekend, played in a storm in Tralee, and their impact was instant. O’Connor in particular scored a magnificent point off his left boot in the first half, awarded the RTÉ man-of-the-match, he also helped make Brian Fenton look like the ordinary player he’d temporarily become. Still only 22, O’Connor would have been a first-choice midfielder throughout 2020 and 2021 had injury not interrupted his run, most notably last summer in the Munster final win over Cork, which meant he only made the bench for the All-Ireland semi-final loss to Tyrone. An All-Ireland minor winner in 2016 and 2017, O’Connor was in the running for the man-of-the-match on Sunday too, but he took a knock to the head in the second half and lost some influence after that. Much has been said already about Kerry’s improved defence in their six games to date, the obvious influence there of backroom team coach Paddy Tally. The former Down manager had left his position last July, after helping them retain their Division Two status, the Tyrone native was also part of Mickey Harte’s backroom team for their All-Ireland victory in 2003. In keeping another clean sheet against Armagh, Kerry still haven’t conceded a goal from open play (a dubious penalty from Conor McManus in the win over Monaghan the one exception). “Happy enough with that, long may it continue,” O’Connor said of Kerry’s defensive record. “We’re just putting emphasis on winning matches, we haven’t a huge amount of training done, just bits and pieces.” Like they did against Mayo in round five, Kerry defended like demons, Jason Foley and Tadhg Morely relentless in ensuring neither Rian O’Neill (four frees and a mark) nor Rory Grugan (two frees) scored from play, Foley on occasion ruthless too. First appearance They’ve also been alternating goalkeepers, Shane Ryan starting against Armagh, Shane Murphy starting against Mayo the week before, with mixed results; the sense is Murphy will get the nod for the championship. Along the way they’ve made up some other numbers too, a first league home win over Mayo since 2009 (losing four and drawing one in between), and last Sunday beat Armagh in the league for the first time since 2011. O’Connor has a thing about winning the league, working it into his preparations before his three previous All-Ireland wins over the years – in 2004, 2006 and 2009 – and his only intention for his third coming as Kerry manager is to win another All-Ireland. In his mind winning another league along with way clearly wouldn’t do that chance any harm. Sunday’s win over Armagh was also significant as it marked Joe O’Connor first appearance since being named as Kerry captain last month, the Austin Stacks player coming on for Barry for the last 10 minutes, his fitness and physical presence at midfield clearly another asset too. O’Connor has yet to make his first start in the league or championship, only now returning from the knee injury sustained in the Munster club final in mid-January, when Austin Stacks narrowly lost out to Cork champions St Finbarr’s. Only Kerry and Kilkenny still retain the old tradition of affording their senior county champions that right; if, however, O’Connor can’t secure a first-choice place, or is out injured, the manager or country board chairman can make the captaincy decision come big match day. With Diarmuid O’Connor and Jack Barry currently at the helm, [Joe] O’Connor’s first-choice task won’t be easy. Kerry –Division One 2022 Round 1: Kerry 1-10 Kildare 0-13 Round 2: Kerry 1-15 Dublin 0-11 Round 3: Kerry 1-13 Donegal 0-7 Round 4: Kerry 3-14 Monaghan 1-12 Round 5: Kerry 1-12 Mayo 0-14 Round 6: Kerry 1-13 Armagh 0-13 For 8-77, Against 1-70