The small cul-de-sac development at Sunbury Park was built in the late 1990s on a plot to the rear of Sunbury Gardens off Dartry Road in Dublin 6. Built by O’Malley Construction, the bay-windowed red-brick houses were designed to blend in with their grand Victorian neighbours. It was probably one of the first schemes to utilise an interior plan that has become common with developers seeking to maximise site potential: build tall, narrow houses with the main bedroom taking up the entire third floor. Like many of its neighbours, number 16 – now for sale through Sherry FitzGerald asking €995,000 – has had significant changes made to its interior since it was built, all of which add to its appeal as a spacious family home. The biggest change is to the ground-floor layout, where originally there were two interconnecting living and dining rooms. This has been altered with the rear of the house reworked so that now there is a good-size living room to the front with a bay window and white marble fireplace. On down the hall and the kitchen is now a large space, lit by three rooflights and glazed doors with plenty of space for a living area, a good-size dining and plenty of storage. Three years ago the owners installed a smart contemporary kitchen with a mix of white and anthracite grey units with a marble top and an island unit. The washing machine, like the fridge and freezer, is concealed behind hall cupboard doors. The new wood-effect floor tiling runs from the kitchen out to the hall. The enclosed back garden faces southwest. Three of the bedrooms and the family bathroom are on the first floor. The largest room is to the front and it has a bay window and en suite shower room. It originally had a walk-in wardrobe with its own window but the owners changed this into a small home office. The main bedroom, with its en suite shower room and walk-in dressingroom, takes up the entire top floor. It has cottage-style ceilings, an arched front window and decorative balcony. To the rear of the roomy dressing area there is extensive, under-eaves storage. In all there is 181sq m (1,948sq ft) of space in the mid-terrace property and the Ber is C2. The angled driveway to the front has parking for one car and there is a small communal green to the front. It is a managed estate, with annual charges of about €800.