Nestled in some of the most beautiful parts of Ireland, these country house hotels are the perfect base to go off for the day and explore, be it a long hike or a leisurely stroll, the luxury of a Blue Book Country House awaits at the end. Here are five of our favourites around Ireland. Coopershill House, Riverstown, Co Sligo Nestled in the centre of a 500-acre private estate, Coopershill House is the ultimate hideaway. It’s also the perfect base for exploring Sligo, with so much to do on the doorstep of this Georgian manor. On a morning stroll within the estate through the woods and deer pastures, you are sure to spot a resident red squirrel or a pine marten. Planning a day out could not be easier. Coopershill offer waking packages where you set out for the day equipped with a delicious picnic stowed away in a handy backpack together with maps and advice. In the evening, return to the roaring fire and admire the antique furniture featured throughout, before dinner served using fresh produce from the garden. Offer: Walking in Yeats Country – 3-night stay, including 3 nights B&B, dinner on 2 evenings and a picnic packed for you. Coopershill will help you plan your walks and provide maps. Price: From €924.00 (total stay) Valid until: 31.10.2022 For more information on this offer, click here Coopershill House will open for 2022 in April. Gregans Castle Hotel, The Burren, Co Clare Gregans Castle Hotel is a luxury, eco and gourmet retreat, nestled in the heart of the beautiful Burren on Ireland’s west coast. Set in its own established and lovingly attended gardens on the Wild Atlantic Way, this beautiful property has spectacular views that stretch across the Burren hills to Galway Bay. There’s so much to see and do in the surrounding areas, including visiting renowned attractions such as the Aran Islands, the Cliffs of Moher and Aillwee Cave. The Burren National Park is a particular highlight for walking enthusiasts. Whether you prefer a 30-minute loop walk or a three-hour walk over limestone hills, there are trails to suit everyone. Gregans can organise half- or full- day walking excursions with a knowledgeable walking guide. The light lunch menu at The Corkscrew Bar in Gregans is ideal after a morning of exploring. In the evening, enjoy a 7- or 10-course menu freshly prepared by head chef Robbie McCauley and his team using fresh produce from the organic garden as well as from local and artisan food producers. Offer: Spring in the Burren – 2-night stay, including 2 nights B&B, a gourmet restaurant dinner on one evening, and an evening turndown service. Price: From €299.00 (per night) Valid until: 14.04.2022 For more information on this offer, click here or call Gregans Castle directly on 065-7077005 Carrig Country House, Killorglin, Co Kerry On the shores of Caragh Lake on the Ring of Kerry, Carrig Country House offers an escape from it all among the most beautiful scenery in Ireland. It is located within the heart of Reek’s District, which stretches from Ireland’s highest peak, Carrauntoohil to the Blue Flag beaches of Castlemaine Harbour. For many visitors, a guided climb to the top of Carrauntoohil is a must-do; with its stunning vistas, this is truly is hard to beat. If you prefer a gentler walk, Carrig is close to enchanting forest walks. Or enjoy the beaches in Rossbeigh or Inch, both with stretching strands for an invigorating walk. With Caragh Lake outside the door, canoeing, kayaking, sailing, fishing, and angling are all available and can be arranged. Overlooking Caragh Lake, The Lakeside Restaurant is the perfect place to unwind after a day of exploring. Good food and wines are a very important part of “The Carrig Experience”. Offer: Wild Atlantic Way Experience – 3-night stay, including 3 nights B&B and dinner on 2 evenings in the Lakeside Restaurant. Price: From €690.00 (total stay) Valid until: 31.10.2022 For more information on this offer, click here or call Carrig Country House directly on 066-9769100 Rosleague Manor, Connemara, Co Galway Set within 30 acres of secluded woodland on the oceans edge, Rosleague Manor is beautifully situated overlooking Ballinakill Bay. Located one mile from Connemara National Park, with its 2,000 hectares of scenic mountains, expanses of bogs, heaths, grasslands, and woodlands for exploring, Rosleague is ideally situated for the most discerning explorer. Another highlight just a five-minute drive from Rosleague Manor is Kylemore Abbey, a haven of history, beauty and serenity. The Kylemore Abbey Victorian Walled Garden is a must-see; comprising roughly 6 acres, the garden is divided in two by a beautiful mountain stream. Rosleague Manor has a strong focus on the finest and freshest locally sourced ingredients and produce. Fresh seafood and Leenane mountain lamb are the  speciality. The selection of wines has been meticulously selected to complement the menus. Offer: One Night in Connemara, including 1 night B&B and a 5-course meal. Price: From €250.00 (total stay) Valid from: 11.04.2022 to 1.11.2022 For more information on this offer, click here Rosleague Manor will open for 2022 in April. Ghan House, Carlingford, Co Louth Ghan House, located just a tree length away from medieval Carlingford, is nestled away among 3 acres of walled mature gardens. The location makes Ghan House perfect for exploring the surrounding area and all that Carlingford has to offer. The Carlingford Omeath Greenway starts at Carlingford Marina, which is less than a five-minute drive from Ghan House. The Greenway provides great views along Carlingford Lough and will take you alongside fields full of grazing sheep, cattle, and horses, and through old railway level crossings. To explore the medieval town of Carlingford,  local tours are available. The Town Tour, which covers the history of Carlingford, is gentle, fun and rated easy on a fitness level. The restaurant at Ghan House utilises the herb and vegetables gardens, using fresh produce for meals. There is also an abundance of superb shellfish from the lough and mountain lamb. Both dining rooms feature high ceilings and large windows with beautiful views of the gardens and surrounding mountains. Offer: Ghan House has a range of packages  to suit everyone. B&B starts from €180.00 based on two people sharing. For a full list of pricing for Ghan House, click here or call them directly on 0429373682 Ireland’s Blue Book is a romantic collection of country houses, historic hotels, castles and restaurants around the island of Ireland. For more information, visit irelandsbluebook.ie