Food and coffee outlets Allta and Cloud Picker have organised a fundraising event on March 8th to aid charities working to help Ukrainians amid the Russian invasion. Chefs Unite for Ukraine will take place in Allta Winter house on the fifth level of Trinity Street car park. The night will include a unique line up of Ireland’s top chefs, including Jordan Bailey (Aimsir), Christine Walsh (Éan), Rob Krawczyk (Restaurant Chestnut) and many others. Tickets to this event cost €175 and all proceeds will go directly to charities helping Ukranians. Art gallery and cocktail lounge, Glovebox, will also be open for walk-ins on the night. It will be hosted by the team from Bar 1661 and guest mixologists from all over Ireland. There will be live entertainment from Toby Hatchett and all proceeds on the evening will also go to the charities. Allta and Cloud Picker will also launch an online auction on March 4th. The highest bidders will be announced on the evening of March 8th by the MC for the evening, Donal Skehan. Auction items include dinner cooked for you in your own home for six guests by two Michelin-starred Chef Mickael Viljanen of Chapter One. A summer party by Allta for a group of 20 in your own home, an overnight stay in Cliff House Hotel including dinner in their Michelin star restaurant and a sea kayaking trip, a spa break in the beautiful Ice House Hotel, a stay in The Westbury, a foraging masterclass with Cúan Greene and lots more. Allta and Cloud Picker have received tremendous support for this event from the Irish hospitality industry, from those volunteering to those sponsoring the event and auction. Cloud Picker have already managed to raise €30,000 for Unicef for Ukraine through their raffle. The raffle will continue over the coming days, and will be drawn at the Chefs Unite for Ukraine dinner on March 8th. Last weekend Allta Winter House and Glovebox donated all their profits from Saturday to Razom for Ukraine, hoping to raise €50,000 in total. Tickets for the Chefs Unite for Ukraine dinner go on sale on March 3rd at midday from alltawinterhouse.ie and cloudpickercoffee.ie. More details on the launch of their online auction can be found on the Instagram accounts for Allta restaurant and Cloud Picker.