An Bord Pleanála has signalled that low-density residential developments in the likes of Sandymount in Dublin 4 will no longer secure planning permission. This came as the appeals board refused planning permission to contentious plans by Walthill Properties Ltd for an 18-unit house scheme for Baggotrath House, Newbridge Avenue, Sandymount, because the scheme didn’t include more homes. In refusing permission for the development located 500m from Sandymount village, the appeals board said the proposal would “provide an insufficient density of the development at this location” and “would constitute under-utilisation of this residential zoned site”. The scheme included 12 three-storey, three-bedroom homes. Local backlash The appeals board refusal overturns a decision by Dublin City Council to grant planning permission in November 2020. The council decision sparked a local backlash, with six separate appeals lodged with An Bord Pleanála against the grant of permission. These came from William Ryan, Anthony Peto, John Sheil and Maria Sheil, Eamon and Catriona Hughes, Noel Boyle, Helen Fitzgerald and Brendan Kinsella. It is now open to Eugene Renehan’s Walthill Properties to lodge revised plans for a scheme with the council that contains more units . One of the conditions attached to the original council grant of permission was that the scheme not be a gated community. In refusing planning permission, the appeals board dismissed the recommendation of its own inspector to grant planning permission. Inspector’s view The board said it shared the inspector’s view that the scheme’s density was materially below the minimum recommended density. It said however that it did not share the inspector’s view that with the prevailing density and character of the area, the lower density could be considered in the case. In their appeals, the local residents variously claimed that the scheme represents overdevelopment, or would result in overlooking, overshadowing and a depreciation in the value of property. Meanwhile, in a separate decision, the appeals board has granted fast-track planning permission to Denver Valley Developments for a 179-unit apartment scheme for a site at Bray Head House and the former site of the North Wicklow Educate Together school in Bray. The bulk of the apartments will be across three apartment blocks rising to five and six storeys in height.