15 Hugo Keenan - An outstanding performance in every facet of the game, he was brilliant under the aerial bombardment, excellent in counter-attack and general running, picking great lines and angles and beating defenders. Rating: 9 14 Andrew Conway - Two outstanding 50-22 kicks, one punt out on the full, chased the high ball gamely but without success, a mix-up for one re-start and didn’t get much opportunity with the ball in hand. Rating: 7 13 Garry Ringrose - A mixed bag of a performance, he cleaned up some sloppy Irish play on several occasions and gave his team positive gain-lines. He had a few turnovers too but worked very hard for his team. Rating: 6 12 Bundee Aki - He carried with typical ferocity and did break the gain-line on a couple of occasions while also used as the fulcrum for the wraparound moves but he may have picked up a bang in the first half as his influence waned a little. Rating: 6 11 James Lowe - A try scorer, he was largely excellent in what he did and made sure that he was a central character in Ireland’s attacking patterns. His strength and awareness are huge assets. He did concede a couple of penalties but an overwhelmingly positive contribution. Rating: 8 10 Johnny Sexton (capt) - He managed the game beautifully in the first 20-minutes but afterwards the team lost a little of its shape in attack and he might reflect on some management issues but when Ireland needed him he stepped up as the team finished strongly. Rating: 7 9 Jamison Gibson-Park - He won the man of the match award, a fair reflection on a high calibre contribution. When the team was producing its best rugby he was at the epicentre, sharp in thought and deed, reflected in the quick tap for Keenan’s try. Rating: 9 1 Cian Healy - Referee Mathieu Raynal and his assistants took a view on who was doing what to whom in the scrum with the two Irish props conceding a fistful of penalties (six). One brilliant intervention near the Irish line turned over possession but a couple of handling errors. Rating: 5 2 Dan Sheehan - His footwork and ball carrying were top class and he beat the first tackler on several occasions whether around the fringes or near the touchline. His lineout throwing was excellent too. Rating: 8 3 Tadhg Furlong - The scrums were a mess, Ellis Genge appeared to step out and around but the officials were happy and ultimately that’s what counts for the 80 minutes. He rolled with the punches through to the 70 minute mark and worked incredibly hard, but it was a tough evening for him. Rating: 6 4 Tadhg Beirne - It may have been unspectacular compared with his stellar best but it doesn’t diminish that manner in which he knuckled down to put in a hard working shift with a couple of typically important moments. Rating: 7 5 James Ryan - Took what was effectively a head butt from Charlie Ewels to the face after 80 seconds with the England secondrow deservedly sent off. Ryan failed his head injury assessment and did not return. Rating: N/A 6 Peter O’Mahony - Industrious and solid but didn’t have much of an influence on the game in the areas that would be expected of him, lineout and breakdown. Rating: 6 7 Josh van der Flier - There is no doubt that England won the battle of the breakdown despite being a man down managing several turnovers or penalties. His linking of play round the pitch, tackling and work-rate was first class. Rating: 7 8 Caelan Doris - He may have had a try disallowed, might have passed a little earlier or with more sympathy that would have led to a try for Conor Murray but these were minor blemishes in a huge performance, long on industry and quality input. Rating: 8 Replacements: Iain Henderson started brilliantly and did some great things but conceded three penalties too but that was a general Achilles heel for the visitors. Robbie Henshaw and Rob Herring both made a huge impact, Jack Conan and Finlay Bealham scored tries, Conor Murray added composure in the end game. Rating: 9 Coach: Andy Farrell will be disappointed with Ireland’s discipline, their handling at times, the decision making and the scrum but overall he will be delighted that the team despite the performance imperfections, managed to secure a bonus point victory at Twickenham. He faces some interesting selection calls for next Saturday’s game against Scotland. Rating: 7