“There’s something visually striking about the violin, with its hourglass shape and varnished wood,” explains Irish-born, New York-based violinist Gregory Harrington. “At each performance I try to complement that elegance and refinement.” The award-winning soloist, whose lengthy list of achievements includes being the first Irish violinist to perform a full-length debut solo recital at New York’s iconic Carnegie Hall, believes communicating through a performance requires a multilayered approach. “It’s not just about the notes you play – they have to be impeccable – it’s about your posture, your demeanour and the air of confidence you bring to a venue. This comes from looking and feeling your best, and clothes are part of that.” The classical crossover violinist, who has played for presidents, politicians, dignitaries and celebrities, describes himself as having a “healthy narcissism”. “Whether I’m working on a Beethoven sonata or Johnny Cash song, I have to believe I can bring something definitive to that piece of music, and when I choose an outfit, I want to feel sure it’s exactly right for the delivery of that rendition.” For Harrington, music, venue and clothes are all part of the show. For his Carnegie Hall performance, he chose a bespoke midnight-blue tuxedo by Alexander Nash. Given the grand surroundings he often performs in – Harrington has played at the Symphony Hall in Boston, the Oriental Arts Centre in Shanghai and Dublin’s National Concert Hall – he’s invested in several three-piece suits by Tom Ford and Charles Tyrwhitt. Given that the violin is such an expressive instrument to play, silhouette and fit are important to Harrington. “I need to be comfortable enough to move as the music demands, so fit is everything, and a sharp silhouette is key to ensuring that my image is consistent with my performance.” Equally, he’s as ready to don a sports sweatshirt if that’s what the venue and performance require. In 2017, for instance, he played the US national anthem for the NFL Green Bay Packers at Lambeau Field before a crowd of 77,000 people wearing the number 22 jersey. “It was another way of connecting with the audience,” he says. Harrington speaks as articulately, and enthusiastically, about personal style, image and the art of communication as he does about music. When not rehearsing, recording, producing or performing to sold-out stadiums and theatres, Harrington is a keynote speaker and consultant to chief executives and politicians, helping them to connect in a meaningful way with their own audiences. “I love being on stage, whether that’s performing or speaking,” explains Harrington. “I offer creative problem-solving through a completely different lens. It’s bringing 25 years’ experience on global stages to the corporate world and using music as a metaphor for how to lead and motivate people.” For these engagements, he explains, “I always want to look approachable and accessible. Clothes should never create a barrier between me and my audience.” He often opts for a beautiful blazer, classic white shirt, jeans and great shoes. “It’s a relaxed but well-pulled-together look.” Harrington enjoys buying classic items that will last the test of time. He has two leather jackets, one from Reiss and the other from All Saints, which he bought 10 years ago and still reaches for regularly. Other notable items in Harrington’s wardrobe include a Tag Heuer Monaco watch, sported by Steve McQueen in the 1971 American car racing drama Le Mans, and a Billy Reid peacoat; the same one worn by Daniel Craig in the 2015 Bond movie, Spectre. Chatting with the 47-year-old over Zoom, I realise his anecdotes are just as stylish as his forever pieces. He tells me of conversations with US president Joe Biden about Yeats, with novelist Salman Rushdie about Hemingway and with Françoise Gilot (Paloma Picasso’s mother) about art and music. “After lunch with Françoise, I bought my father a gift of Paloma Picasso Tiffany cufflinks. He came on tour with me well into his 80s and he always wore them. Since he passed away I’ve worn them for every performance. They bring a positive energy to everything I do.” While he clearly has some very special, and expensive, pieces in his wardrobe, Harrington’s style is about mixing high and low fashion. “For me, it’s never about buying something expensive. It’s about making something look good by the manner in which you project yourself.” When he returns to Dublin, he often shops in Jack & Jones. “Their clothes have a European feel, which I like; you can’t go wrong with a pair of jeans and a white T-shirt from there.” His favourite store in Dublin is Massimo on Dawson Street for casual blazers. Harrington says he has become more style-aware since living in New York, and describes America as “a very visually aware culture”. While he attends New York Fashion Week (“it’s fun to go and there’s an interesting crowd”), he’s less interested in the nuances of designer collections and more concerned with the appeal of individual pieces. Harrington is a man who knows what he likes and wants, from choosing his first violin in McCullough Pigott at the age of four to those precious heirloom cufflinks. For him, style is about elegant simplicity. Gregory Harrington’s new album, a collection of Irish songs, including contemporary anthems and traditional ballads, is due for release in April.