Salty stuff Healing sounds and salty stuff are on the menu at Gorey’s Ashdown Park. The Co Wexford spot has launched its new Asha Spa, which includes a Himalayan salt wall. No, you don’t put crampons on and set up base camp – you lounge around as it emits all manner of detoxificationey things. Add sound wave therapy and you’ve no excuse for feeling grotty – unless you’ve decided to let them look after you rather too well the night before. B&B, plus dinner and two spa treatments from €320 for two. Or take two nights, and add the thrill of the Spa Wave Therapy bed, plus a Voya facial. From €495 for two.ashdownparkhotel.com Marvellous mothers Ahh where would we be without them? Ireland’s hospitality hot spots have been pulling out the stops to round up treats and sleeps for the occasion. Galway’s Hardiman has Afternoon Tea from €28pp, or make it an overnight with dinner, including a gift (for your mum – NOT you!) from €245 for two, thehardiman.ie. Kenmare’s Sheen Falls Lodge in Kerry has afternoon tea for €70 for two, and add champagne for an extra thirty quid. Overnight from €365, or give her a gift voucher to spend at her leisure, sheenfallslodge.ie. Mothers who don’t like afternoon tea might get a bit stuck, as it does seem to be the go-to activity. The Westbury’s version is a super fancy €60 per person, or €78 with Champagne – but don’t forget, she did give birth to you, doylecollection.com. Lost at sea I have occasionally wondered about cruise ships. I mean you can’t miss them when they come into port, but what about getting lost on board? The lads at Princess Cruises have a neat solution – a handy wearable medallion is room key, bar tab, meal ticket and locator all in one. Yes, not only can the Princess team find you with your snacks order, even if you have wandered off; you can also track your loved ones should they go astray. Note: they have to consent first. Take a seven-night Mexican Riviera Cruise departing Los Angeles on April 10th from £699 pps (excl flights), or closer to home, but further away in time, seven nights cruising from Athens to Barcelona, via some Italian hot spots, is from £589 pps (excl flights) departing July 16th, princess.com. Just the tonic It is always useful to have someone in the know when it comes to local attractions. Irishwoman Deirdre O’Connor is the expert in all things Mallorca, offering hints and tips, room discounts, upgrades and complimentary cava. Sure what else could you want? Try the new Pure Salt Port de Sóller adults only (and children over 14), opening on April 1st with rates from €140 B&B including 10 per cent off using the code PSTONIC. Or get your design fix at Concepcio by Nobis, in a former 16th-century soap factory in the heart of Palma. Now that does call for bubbles. From €204 B&B in April, including 15 per cent, off plus add a bottle of cava with the code TONIC. Find it all at mallorcantonic.com. Both Aer Lingus and Ryanair will get you there.