A man has been fatally stabbed and an older man injured in a house in Carrigaline, Co Cork in the early hours of the morning. Gardaí have arrested a man aged 42 for questioning about the incident. The deceased, named locally as Shane Murphy (27), was pronounced dead at the scene in the house at Sea View Avenue after the emergency services were called there at around 3.30am. It is understood the man was stabbed in the upper body in an upstairs bedroom of the house and his remains have been removed from the scene, which has been cordoned off by gardaí. A postmortem examination was carried out at Cork University Hospital (CUH), the results of which are not being released for operational reasons, gardaí say. The older man, a father of the deceased, named locally as “Weeshie” Murphy (75), is being treated at CUH for non-life threatening but serious injuries and gardaí hope to be given permission by doctors to speak to him later today. Meanwhile, gardaí have arrested a man aged 42 for questioning about the fatal stabbing and the attack on the older man. The man was arrested this morning under Section 4 of the Criminal Justice Act which allows gardaí detain suspects for up to 24 hours and he is currently being held at Gurranebraher Garda Station. Sinn Féin TD for Cork South Central Donnchadh Ó Laoghaire said this morning: “Devastating news coming out of Carrigaline this morning. Completely shocking, impossible to comprehend. Such a young life taken away. “My thoughts with the family and friends and the wider community in Carrigaline, Passage and the surrounding areas. There are no words,” Mr Ó Laoghaire tweeted. Gardaí requested the services of the State Pathologist’s Office and Acting Assistant State Pathologist, Dr Heidi Okkers. A garda technical team also came to the house and it is understood that the knife believed to be the weapon used in the attack remains preserved at the scene for a forensic examination later. Gardaí have also begun door-to-door inquiries in the quiet estate off Church Road on the east side of Carrigaline to try and establish if anyone heard any disturbance in the early hours of the morning. Anyone who can assist gardaí with any information is asked to contact Carrigaline Garda Station on 021-4919370 or Togher Garda Station on 021-4947120 or Garda Confidential Line on 1800 666 111.