A major new initiative to try to secure thousands of visas for Irish people to live and work in the US has been launched by senior political figures in Washington. US Senate majority whip Dick Durbin, chair of Senate judiciary committee and Senator Pat Toomey, ranking member of the Senate Banking Committee, introduced bipartisan legislation on Thursday to add Ireland to what is known technically as the E3 non-immigrant visa programme. The Bill would allow Irish nationals annual access to any unused E3 visas from the previous fiscal year. In exchange, Ireland intends to provide Americans expanded access to work visas in Ireland. The programme currently provides for about 10,000 visas to be allocated annually to Australia. Immigration reform advocates have maintained if the measure is passed by Congress it could see up to 5,000 people annually obtain US visas. “The United States and Ireland have long championed the ideals of liberty and freedom, which has allowed our nations to form an unshakeable bond that nurtures these ideals,” Senator Durbin said in a statement. “I thank Senator Toomey for again partnering with me on this bipartisan Bill, which is a vital reiteration of not only our commitment to these principles, but also to our invaluable friendship with Ireland and its citizens. I remain committed to working to quickly pass this bipartisan legislation, as well as other critically-needed fixes to our broken immigration system.” Senator Toomey said the US has “long benefited from people coming here to work hard and contribute to our economy. “With this legislation, highly-skilled Irish workers can apply for the E3 non-immigrant visa programme to continue this tradition. I appreciate Senator Durbin working with me on this bipartisan immigration Bill, which will strengthen America’s relationship with Ireland.” The two Senators introduced a similar bipartisan Bill in the previous Congress. An identical companion Bill led by Congressman Richard Neal, chair of the House Committee on Ways and Means, passed the House of Representatives last Congress. However, the previous efforts to introduce the measure fell when it was opposed by one Republican senator. Congressman Neal said: “The relationship between the United States and Ireland has always been strong. “And this legislation for E3 non-immigrant visas will only make it stronger. As we celebrate St Patrick’s Day, let us recognise and honour the achievements and contributions that Irish-Americans have made to our country. With this legislation we will continue to be the land of opportunity and extend a hand to those who want to share in the American dream.” The E3 treaty professional visa is a temporary work visa currently limited to citizens of Australia. Up to 10,500 E3 visas may be granted each year and the visas are valid for up to two years on a renewable basis. Qualifying jobs in the US for which an E3 visa may be obtained require a minimum of a bachelor’s degree in a speciality occupation. On Tuesday, Taoiseach Micheál Martin said the Government wanted to see the development of new legal mechanisms to facilitate the two-way exchange of people between Ireland and the US. Former Fine Gael TD John Deasy who along with former Senator Billy Lawless has been lobbying in Washington to revise the E3 visas scheme, said on Thursday: “It’s important these senior senators are showing intent regarding the passage of the E3 Bill. We believe they’ll attempt to put together another immigration package this year, and they’re clearly indicating we’ll be included if that happens.” Meanwhile the US House of Representatives has passed unanimously a resolution criticising any move by the British government to block investigations into or prosecutions of crimes during the troubles in Northern Ireland. The resolution also urges that the urges that the Belfast Agreement be implemented in full to ensure peace and stability on the island of Ireland; The resolution calls on the European Union, including the Republic of Ireland, and the United Kingdom to act in good faith with regard to negotiations around Brexit and implementation of the Northern Ireland protocol. It also calls on the UK government “to charge individuals who committed unjustifiable crimes on Bloody Sunday”. The resolution was proposed by Democratic congressman William Keating and had been backed by the Ancient Order of Hibernians.