With outstanding sea views of Wicklow lighthouse taking in the coastline from Howth to Arklow, Wingfield House on a summer’s day also offers the possibility to spot Wales. Located 2.5km from Wicklow town, the property has been tastefully remodelled and extended into what it is today: a five-bedroom home measuring a generous 385sq m (4,144sq ft) standing on almost 11 acres (almost 4.5 hectares). Designed by architectural firm Padraig Smith Partnership, much thought and consideration went into the plans to convert and enlarge the old farmhouse. A three-level extension was constructed to the rear of the original house and this is where the family who currently lives here spends most of their time. With an Aga and wood-burning stove in the home, light flows into its living space through the William Cox skylights and French doors, which open on to three balconies taking in southern, northern and easterly aspects. All five bedrooms are en suite: two are upstairs in the original house, and the three remaining are in the contemporary extension. Nestled among mature trees for shelter, the property is close to the marina for sailing, and just a short drive to sandy beaches for year-round swims. There are a number of championship golf courses in the area, including Powerscourt and Druid’s Glen. For equestrian enthusiasts there are a number of showjumping, polo and cross-country stables nearby and there’s lots of room for a pony on the property. The five-bedroom house will appeal to those wanting a private location and secluded gardens with captivating views. In addition to the house, there is a greenhouse, and there are three stone outhouses with slate roofs. Although currently used for storage, they have electrics and water so have a host of other uses if converted, although they will need planning permission for accommodation purposes. “For someone who needs to get away from it all, the place is perfect,” says the current owner, who has hosted 100 people for a birthday party in the property. “What I will miss will be the peace. We have been married for 41 years and have never had a row.” Perhaps the acres of gardens and superb views at a house that measures close to 400sq m, with an impressive Ber of B1, might help. The five-bedroom property was last on the market in 2016, when it was seeking €1.5 million through Ganly Walters. It did not sell, and is now seeking €1.25 million through Warren Estates.