Irish people must demand an “immediate ceasefire” in Ukraine, respect for humanitarian law and the withdrawal of Russian troops, President Michael D Higgins has said in his St Patrick’s Day message. Mr Higgins said a “dark shadow” has been cast across the world as it witnesses the unfolding events in Ukraine. “I know that the hearts of Irish people and Irish communities across the world go out to all of those who are suffering from this completely unacceptable, immoral and unjustified, invasion and violence to their lives,” he said. “Our greatest hope for a future of hope and peace springs from the open hearts and doors of those saying ‘tar isteach’, come in. “Let us, as one human family connected through our shared heritage, join with all those who stand in solidarity with the people of Ukraine as they struggle to protect their right to live in freedom, security and peace. Troop withdrawal “We, the peoples of the world must also now and with urgency unite our voices in demanding an immediate ceasefire, respect for humanitarian law and the withdrawal of Russian troops.” He added that everyone must play a role with a restoration of independence and security to a nation “that has demonstrated such courage, resilience and love of their country” in recent times. Mr Higgins also talked about the Covid-19 pandemic and paid tribute to how Irish people have coped with the crisis. “It is our shared hope that we are beginning to emerge from the dark shadow of the pandemic, and we can do so in the knowledge that we, as a society, had workers that sought to give meaning to those most important values, by walking shoulder to shoulder with those suffering,” he said. ‘Social solidarity’ “Personal risks were taken to keep us safe, by those who continued to work, so often again and again at personal and family risk, whatever the task. “During that time of the pandemic at its worst we learned so much about the cost of the decisions made and ethics on which true social solidarity must be built. We witnessed the power of an appeal for supportive, collective action in reducing public health risks. It was given. “We experienced the strength of community purpose and social care in helping us navigate our way through difficult and anxious times. “We must never forget the frontline workers across society who make community life possible and able to be shared.”