Sligo Rovers 0 Dundalk 0 A bitterly cold night in the northwest ended with a share of the spoils as Dundalk and Sligo Rovers played out a scoreless draw at the Showgrounds. The result means both sides are unbeaten so far this Premier Division season, but the chances of a win were slim for either side on a heavy pitch that made free-flowing football near impossible. Minus the influential midfielder Greg Bolger, the hosts did manage to create the best chances in what was the first home game of the campaign. Full back Lewis Banks hit the crossbar, and they also had a goal disallowed. But Stephen O’Donnell’s youthful Dundalk earned their point on the road – their third draw in their four games so far. They had half-chances in the opening half through Patrick Hoban and Steven Bradley, but they had to dig deep in the second half, with centre backs Andy Boyle and Mark Connolly to the fore. Aidan Keena almost deflected an early Banks shot to the goal but Rovers offered little else as an attacking unit in the opening half. They increased the tempo after the restart though, and Banks was unfortunate to see his looping header from Adam McDonnell’s cross hit the top of the bar. Keena had another chance midway through the half after being set up by Karl O’Sullivan, but dragged his shot wide. And the same fate befell McDonnell at the death, as substitute Seamas Keogh opened up the Dundalk defence and McDonnell teed himself up for an effort inside the box, but dragged his shot across goal and narrowly wide. O’Donnell found himself in referee Neil Doyle’s bad books when he was booked in the second half, but he had to be pleased with his side’s second successive clean sheet and a point on the road. SLIGO ROVERS: McGinty, Banks, Buckley, Pijnaker, Kirk, Cawley (Keogh, 78 mins), Morahan, McDonnell, O’Sullivan, Fitzgerald (Byrne, 78 mins), Keena (Hamilton, 78 mins). DUNDALK: Shepperd, Macari, Connolly, Boyle, Bone, Sloggett, Benson, Williams (Ward, 78 mins), Bradley (Adams, 89 mins), Kelly (Martin, 54 mins), Hoban. Referee: N Doyle.