California-based company Ultra Clean Holdings is to create 100 new jobs in Co Cavan as it establishes an “advanced technology cleaning centre” that will primarily support Intel and other European-based customers. Ultra Clean Holdings is a Nasdaq-listed company that develops and supplies critical sub-systems, components and parts, as well as ultra-high purity cleaning and analytical services, primarily for the semiconductor industry. “Ultra Clean Holdings has a long-standing commitment to sustainability and continually strives to minimise its impact on the environment,” said Shay Torton, the group’s vice-president for operations in Europe, the Middle East and Africa. “The new site will be constructed with sustainable solutions where possible, and we are committed to enhancing the Cavan economy and community by being an active partner and good neighbour.” Construction is advancing at the 57,000sq ft manufacturing facility located on the IDA Ireland Business and Technology Park at Killgarry, and is expected to be completed and operational in the third quarter of this year. Roles at the new facility will include engineering, manufacturing, facilities, on-site shipping and receiving, quality control, sales, and customer service positions. Global footprint Bill Bentinck, president of Ultra Clean Holdings, said: “As a worldwide leader in ultra-clean parts cleaning and analytics, we are proud to partner with IDA Ireland to expand our global footprint and advance our leading-edge technology. “This state-of-the-art facility will enable us to better serve and deliver value to our European customer base and capitalise on longer-term growth opportunities.” IDA Ireland chief executive Martin Shanahan said: “Ultra Clean Holdings’ manufacturing and analytical capabilities will add to the level of expertise within the semiconductor sector here and positions the region to capture further such investment.” Minister for Enterprise Leo Varadkar said the company will have a “rich talent pool” to choose from to fill the 100 new jobs. “Semiconductor chips have become essential to our everyday lives and that dependence is only going to grow,” he said. “This advanced technology cleaning centre is a really welcome addition to the thriving semiconductor industry here – an industry which we are keen to expand further.”