Ulster 18 Leinster 13 Played in atrocious conditions, it was Ulster who prevailed in this rearranged interpro to claim a rare double over Leinster after winning earlier this season at the RDS. This top-of-the-table clash was never going to be much more than a slug-fest thanks to the weather and the hosts deserved their four points after simply being more accurate with their chances, which saw Sam Carter and Michael Lowry cross the line in the opening half. The losing bonus point kept Leinster on top but only by a point from their hosts in a game which saw Ross Byrne’s 41st-minute penalty the only score of the second 40 minutes. Ulster opened up with a well-worked eighth-minute score from lock Sam Carter after a good bust from John Andrew off a maul and a carry via Marty Moore which nearly breached the Leinster line. Nathan Doak added the straightforward two points. Four minutes later Ross Byrne responded to cut the Ulster lead with a penalty. They then took the lead four minutes before the half hour after Lowry had knocked on in the backfield as Leinster were getting good traction from kicking deep. A series of penalties then came Leinster’s way and after the forwards took it through several pick and jams, the visitors opened it up and Max Deegan crashed through to score. Ross Byrne converted and Leinster lead 10-7 though Doak then levelled things up five minutes later with a penalty. Even though the rain increased, the game really came to life on 34 minutes when Ulster moved the ball right and Lowry and Robert Baloucoune combined down the right – with Billy Burns also involved – allowing Lowry to benefit and score. Doak missed the extras but Ulster now led 15-10 and they finished the half a further three points ahead after Ross Molony was pinged at the breakdown allowing Doak nail the penalty with the final play of the half. Leinster needed a bright start to the second and got it after Adam Byrne helped wrap up Craig Gilroy to win a penalty with Ross Byrne slotting the points. Further scoring opportunities then went against Leinster. The first when Alan O’Connor nicked a lineout near the Ulster line. And then on the hour as Tommy O’Brien was smashed into touch by Baloucoune and though Leinster then used their penalty advantage they were done for obstruction from a series of pick and drives. Then on 65 minutes Jamie Osborne had the ball dislodged when hit close to the line by Burns after Leinster had put together a long passage of phase play and that proved to be Leinster’s last significant chance to take the game. ULSTER: M Lowry; R Baloucoune, S Moore, S McCloskey, C Gilroy; B Burns, N Doak; A Warwick, J Andrew, M Moore; A O’Connor (capt), S Carter; M Rea, N Timoney, D Vermeulen. Replacements: T Stewart for Andrew (37 mins), E O’Sullivan for Warwick, M Kearney for Carter, J Cooney for Doak (all 47); J Murphy for Rea (54), B Moxham for Vermeulen (66), G Milasinovich for Moore (79). LEINSTER: J O’Brien; A Byrne, R O’Loughlin, J Osborne, T O’Brien; R Byrne L McGrath (capt); P Dooley, J Tracy, M Ala’alatoa; R Molony, J McCarthy; R Ruddock, S Penny, M Deegan. Replacements: S Cronin for Tracy, D Leavy for Penny(both 56 mins), N McCarthy for McGrath (66), T Clarkson for Ala’alatoa (67), M Moloney for Ruddock (69), D Toner for Molony (71), D Hawkshaw for J O’Brien (74). , T Lasisi for Byrne (79). Referee: F Murphy (IRFU).