Almost 16,000 positive test results for Covid-19 were reported on Friday, the highest figure since the lifting of restrictions. The reporting comprises 9,186 cases confirmed by PCR and notified to the Health Protection Surveillance Centre (HPSC) on Friday, and 6,752 notifications of positive antigen results on Thursday. The figure for PCR-confirmed cases is more than twice the number recorded on Thursday, and more than five times Wednesday’s figure. Asked to clarify, the Department of Health said a technical issue earlier in the week resulted in a low number of cases being reported last Wednesday. As a result, additional cases were put on the system on Friday. At present, PCR testing is restricted to at-risk groups such as over-55s, pregnant women, healthcare workers and those with weak immune systems. The combined figure of almost 16,000 PCR- or antigen-confirmed positives reported on Friday is the highest since mass antigen testing was introduced. Meanwhile, the number of patients with Covid-19 in hospital has increased by over 50 per cent in less than a fortnight. There were 907 patients with the virus in hospital on Friday, up 30 on the previous day. It is estimated about half of these patients are in hospital for other reasons and were diagnosed with the virus during their stay. The 158 new hospital patients diagnosed with Covid-19 in the past 24 hours is the highest figure since January 12th. The number of hospitalised patients is likely to rise further due to the recent increase in cases. ICU patients In contrast, the number of ICU patients with Covid-19 continues to fall, down by four to 37 on Friday. This is the lowest figure since August 12th last year. On Thursday evening, there were 89 patients with Covid-19 in Beaumont Hospital, 69 in Letterkenny hospital and 65 in the Mater hospital, according to the latest HSE report. All hospitals had patients with the virus and there were 17 children with Covid-19 in the three Dublin children’s hospitals. Eight hospitals reported having no general beds available and 15 had no free ICU beds. There were three children with Covid-19 in intensive care. Over 95 per cent of the adult population are fully vaccinated and 70 per cent have received a booster dose, according to the latest HPSC figures. However, only 16 per cent of 12-17 year olds have been administered a booster. Meanwhile, flu activity continues to increase in the community, according to the latest HPSC update. There were 45 hospitalisations with flu notified last week, all type A. So far this winter season, 136 flu cases have been hospitalised. One further hospital outbreak was reported, in the west. There were no further critical care admissions or deaths last week, the HPSC said.