Krispy Kreme is to open its first Dublin city centre outlet in May. A spokeswoman for the US-owned doughnut maker confirmed the opening date after Dublin City Council granted planning permission for the fit-out of the outlet at Central Plaza on Dame Street subject to the company meeting conditions attached to the permission. The council gave the green light for the outlet after Krispy Kreme moved to tone down and reduce the size of its corporate signage in response to concerns raised by the council. The conditions attached to the permission said that the US company will have to make further changes to the corporate signage before the store can open. In one of the nine conditions attached, the council told Krispy Kreme Ireland that the use of the premises should not commence until revised plans and drawings showing that the further changes have been submitted to, and agreed in writing by, the planning authority. The council planner’s report said that the reduction in the size of the main brand sign by 25 per cent is to be welcomed. Visual impact However, the council report stated that the applicant’s comments that the proposed signage will not have a visual impact on the subject site or the surrounding context is not considered accurate, “and it is considered reasonable that a more subtle signage composition and colour scheme should be accommodated at this location”. As a result, the council has ordered by way of condition that the internally illuminated lettering to the main signage shall be omitted and replaced by individually pin-mounted steel lettering; that any proposed illumination of the main signage shall be subtly backlit; and the green-and-red colouring of the main signage shall be replaced with a brushed steel finish. Originally, it was intended to open Krispy Kreme’s Central Plaza unit “circa Christmas 2021” subject to planning permission for the signage attached to the restaurant. However, the US-owned company missed out on the busy Christmas season after the council last November sought changes to proposed signage. The Central Plaza store will be Krispy Kreme’s third in the capital.