This is a massive week for the countries still hoping to reach the World Cup in Qatar. Fifteen of the 32 spots have been filled already, with 44 teams still competing for the final 17 places – and all but three of them will be settled over the coming days. Europe Who has qualified? Serbia, Spain, Switzerland, France, Belgium, Denmark, Netherlands, Croatia, England, Germany Who can still qualify? Portugal, Turkey, Scotland, Poland, Italy, North Macedonia, Ukraine, Sweden, Austria, Wales, Czech Republic What’s the state of play for Uefa teams? There are 13 spots available at the World Cup for Uefa teams and 10 of them have already gone to the group winners. With just three spots remaining for the 11 sides in the playoffs, at least one heavyweight is going to miss out. Portugal did not win either of their last two group games – Serbia beat them in their final group game thanks to a last-minute goal from Aleksandar Mitrovic – and they have been consigned to the playoffs. To make matters worse, they have been drawn in the same pathway as Euro 2020 winners, Italy – as well as North Macedonia and Turkey – which means that at least one of the last two European champions will not be in Qatar. Russia’s disqualification means Poland have been given a bye and will play either Sweden or Czech Republic for a place at the World Cup. Meanwhile, Wales or Austria will have to wait a little longer to discover their opponent as Scotland’s game against Ukraine has been postponed with a new date yet to be confirmed. Poland are one win from the finals after their play-off with Russia was cancelled. South America Who has qualified? Brazil, Argentina Who can still qualify? Chile, Peru, Uruguay, Ecuador, Colombia, Bolivia What’s the state of play for Conmebol teams? All 10 teams in South America play in one big group, with the top four qualifying for the World Cup and the fifth-placed team going into a playoff against a country from the Asian federation. Brazil and Argentina have already booked their places at Qatar 2022. They sit first and second, respectively, in the South American qualifying group with no chance of dropping out of the automatic spots. However, with two rounds of games to go in the group, there is still plenty to play for. Ecuador, Uruguay, Peru, Chile, Colombia and Bolivia all harbour hopes of a spot at the World Cup. Ecuador are third in the group and are guaranteed at least a playoff spot. If they win either of their last two group games – against Paraguay and Argentina – they will book an automatic spot at the World Cup. The big match in qualifying this week is between fourth-placed Uruguay and fifth-placed Peru in Montevideo. Just one point separates the pair before the penultimate round of games. Chile have reached the knockout stages in two of the last three World Cups but may miss out on Qatar. They are sixth in the table and face Brazil and Uruguay in their last two group matches. Colombia sit four points behind fifth-placed Peru but they have a more favourable end to qualifying, with games against Bolivia and Venezuela. Bolivia must win their last two games and hope other results go their way if they are to secure the playoff spot. North, Central America and Caribbean Who has qualified? No one yet. Who can still qualify? Canada, USA, Mexico, Panama, Costa Rica, El Salvador What is the state of play for Concacaf teams? We are at the third round of qualifying, an eight-team league from which four teams can reach the World Cup – the top three in the league go directly to Qatar and the fourth-placed side plays off against the country that tops qualifying in Oceania. Canada have been sensational in qualifying and are on the verge of reaching the World Cup for only the second time in their history, after Mexico 1986. They are unbeaten in qualifying and are currently four points clear at the top of the table with three games to play. USA and Mexico are second and third in the table respectively, and are well placed to clinch the two other automatic spots. They meet at the Azteca this week for what could be a crucial game. With Panama four points behind, neither side will want to lose in Mexico City. El Salvador still have a slim chance of sneaking into the playoff spot, but Costa Rica are the bigger threat to fourth-placed Panama. Africa Who has qualified? No one yet Who can still qualify? Egypt, Senegal, Cameroon, Algeria, Ghana, Nigeria, DR Congo, Morocco, Mali, Tunisia What is the state of play for CAF teams? There are five spots available for African sides at the World Cup and qualifying has reached the winner-takes-all stage. The 10 group winners are playing each other in five two-legged ties over the next week. The five ties have thrown up some major battles, notably a repeat of last month’s Africa Cup of Nations final in which Senegal defeated Egypt. Elsewhere, it’s Cameroon v Algeria, Ghana v Nigeria, DR Congo v Morocco, and Mali v Tunisia – so some big names will miss out on Qatar. Asia Who has qualified? Qatar, Iran, South Korea Who can still qualify? Saudi Arabia, Japan, Australia, United Arab Emirates, Lebanon, Iraq What is the state of play for AFC teams? Qatar have qualified automatically as hosts; four more teams will join them, and one team will go into a playoff game. The long qualifying campaign in Asia is coming to an end. The 12 teams left in qualifying have been divided into two groups of six, with the top two from each group securing a spot at the World Cup and the two third-placed sides facing off for a chance to play the fifth-placed side in South American qualifying. In Group A, Iran and South Korea have sewn up their spots at the World Cup. With two games to play UAE are in the driving seat to secure the playoff spot, but Lebanon and Iraq still have a chance of finishing third. In the other group, Saudi Arabia, Japan and Australia are fighting it out for the two automatic spots at the World Cup. Australia are currently third in the table but, with games to come against Japan and Saudi Arabia, they can still qualify automatically. Oceania Who has qualified? No one Who can still qualify? Cook Islands, New Zealand, Solomon Islands, Tahiti, Fiji, Papua New Guinea What is the state of play for OFC teams? Only one side from Oceania can qualify for the World Cup. To do so, they not only have to overcome the other sides from the region, but also win a playoff against the fourth-placed team in Concacaf, a spot currently occupied by Panama. Qualification in Oceania has been badly affected by the Covid-19 outbreak and travel restrictions, with several countries withdrawing. The final two rounds of qualifying are being played in Qatar, with New Zealand the team to beat. The All Whites have secured their place in the four-team final knockout stage with Solomon Islands, Papua New Guinea, Tahiti, Fiji and Cook Islands still in the hunt to join them. – Guardian