Consumer sentiment has plunged in the wake of the Ukraine conflict and increased inflation fears. The latest KBC Bank Ireland index recorded the sharpest month-on-month drop in sentiment in two years and since the first wave of the pandemic. The survey fell to 67 in March from 77 in February on foot of the tragedy unfolding in Ukraine and the related economic and financial fallout for Ireland. Eoin Burke-Kennedy has the details. In her weekly column Karlin Lillington argues that it is Ireland’s intangible attributes that attracted the big tech companies. It wasn’t all about the corporate tax rate. Neil Briscoe finds that a tidal energy generator is, in very simplistic terms, rather like turning a hydro-power station inside out – turbines on the inside, water on the outside. Olive Keogh meets women’s digital health companyI IdentifyHer, which has lined up a founding team with extensive experience in data analysis, disease prevention, sensor development, AI and women’s health to develop a wearable tracker that can help manage life-disrupting menopausal symptoms. Cantillon argues that without decent data we cannot know what international visitors to these shores want and why they are coming here and also considers the BAI’s take on the imminent Media Commission. Dublin City University spin-out Pilot Photonics has secured a further €1.8 million in funding from backers, writes Charlie Taylor. Ciara O’Brien reviews the Microsoft Surface Laptop Studio. Revolut has officially begun operating as a bank in the Republic with the launch of protected deposit accounts for Irish customers. The fintech, which has 18 million customers globally and 1.7 million in Ireland, said it has operationalised its European specialised banking licence here. Charlie Taylor reports. With energy prices soaring and fears mounting over access to oil and gas, Cliff Taylor, on ourInside Business podcast, speaks to Muireann Lynch, energy economist with the ESRI and Gerard Brady, chief economist at Ibec about the potential impact of EU embargoes on Russian energy supplies. Later on, Cliff is joined by Kevin O’Donovan, managing director at Statkraft Ireland and senior vice president of the company’s wind and solar activities across northern Europe. They speak about Statkraft’s Irish offshore wind project, North Irish Sea Array and the future of renewable energy in Ireland. Stay up to date with all our business news: sign up to our business news alerts and our Business Today daily email news digest.