Shelbourne 1 Bohemian 0 It was a sense of deja vu for captain Pearl Slattery as she scored her Shelbourne’s opening goal of the new season, for the third year in a row. In the 75th minute, Shels were awarded a corner and Slattery connected with the ball in the air putting it past Bohs goalkeeper Rachael Kelly. Manager Noel King’s side looked comfortable for the most part but Bohs really put it up to Shels with great defending, keeping the match a close contest throughout. Slattery’s header gifted all three points to the champions, a great start to their campaign. DLR Waves 5 Treaty United 0 It was a big day for 16-year-old striker Joy Ralph as she got on the scoresheet twice, becoming the club’s youngest ever player and youngest ever goalscorer. The Waves got their first win of the season and there was nothing that could be faulted about their performance. Lots of chances were created and it was overall a clinical showing, much more so than any display last season. Goals from Kerri Letmon, Avril Brierly and a debut goal from Lynn Craven helped The Waves to their win. Graham Kelly couldn’t have asked for more from his side, as they look to break into the top three of the WNL table this season. Peamount United 6 Sligo Rovers 0 A dominant display from Peamount United in a six-goal thriller at PRL Park left Sligo Rovers with a lot to learn from their first ever WNL game. It’s only series one and we already have a goal of the season contender from Peamount’s Dora Gorman, who scored her side’s first goal in the 21st minute with a fantastic strike into the top corner. New signing Erin McLaughlin had as solid a debut as you could hope, setting up many chances and even scoring a debut goal, Peamount’s second in the 32nd minute. Two more goals were scored each by Peas duo Stephanie Roche and Áine O’Gorman and with O’Gorman playing her football further up the pitch this season, there’s no question that she’ll be looking to retain the golden boot. It was a tough scoreline for Sligo Rovers’ first game, but there are many positives for them to take from the match that will be beneficial going into series two. Cork City 0 Galway WFC 3 It was a dream start to the campaign for Galway, who are looking to edge even further up the table this season. Taking advantage of their time in possession and their early dominance, Galway deservedly took home all three points. Goals in the first half from Nicole McNamara and Aoibhínn Donnelly set Alan Murphy’s side on their way. Cork had spells where they were coming into the game, but Galway played some really good football on the ground and wrapped things up with a finish from Julie-Ann Russell. Athlone Town 1 Wexford Youths 2 A fantastic second-half comeback by Wexford saw them take all three points in a hard-fought win against Athlone. It was a very even match between the two teams with great movement and passing, but no side really tested either keeper. Athlone applied pressure early on and after a great counter attack on the right-hand side, Emily Corbet slotted home with a composed finish just before the break. Wexford had to really work hard in the second half and that’s just what they did. In the 75th minute, Ellen Molloy hit the target with a great free-kick just outside the box to make it 1-1. Momentum was on the Youths side and in the 80th minute, debutant Jess Lawler nodded the ball into the back of the net from a corner. An extremely hard earned win for Wexford in what was a thriller of a game between the two sides.