Number 7 Botanic Avenue is a three-bedroom period redbrick house in pristine condition. There isn’t a thing out of place anywhere in its 120 sq m (1,291 sq ft) of space. It was purchased by its current owners four years ago when they paid €397,000 for it, according to the Property Price Register. At that time, when architect Jonathan Nugent bought it, it looked nothing like it does today. In 2018 it was, as estate agents like to politely put it, in need of complete modernisation. It has since been rewired, replumbed, insulated – including damp-proof coursing – and has been greatly enlarged. A big draw was its huge back garden that probably extended to about 30m (100ft). However, as it faces north, Nugent’s key consideration was to bring in as much light as possible to the back of the property. The hall door now opens into a smartly tiled floor with a TV room to the right. This is painted an intense rich peacock blue, one of several joyful colours from Crown Paint’s Elle Decoration range used to great effect in its period rooms where the ceiling heights are 2.9m. There’s a concealed utility cupboard under the stairs, hidden behind tongue and groove panelling, and there’s an internal shower room to its rear. Across the hall is the first of the property’s three double bedrooms. It has a deep shade of wet sand on the ceiling down to the picture rail and it overlooks a small internal courtyard that brings plenty of light in. The original outline of its fireplace has been tiled in a stylish way that nods to its past while blocking the aperture, part of a deep level of insulation that has earned the property a B3 Ber. It’s a bedroom setup that won’t suit young children, but tweens or teens may love being able to get some distance from their parents or younger siblings. There’s a large open-plan room to the that has a beamed roof, supported by a decorative but also structural criss-cross effect, which has all been painted a soft bone white. Flush with the ceiling is a large rooflight that pours light into the centre of this large room. It is positioned to be able to catch the sun the minute it rises above the roof, explains Nugent, and it is a clever idea others could use in spaces with a similar aspect spaces. The simple kitchen setup features units on the two walls, a bank of soft grey Ikea units to the right and below-counter units on the opposite wall. These are mainly deep, easy to access drawers and there’s a simple tiled splashback. There is a dining table in the middle. At the far end of the room, overlooking the large patio, is a sitting area where kids can watch TV. Nugent deliberately extended the patio area out far enough to benefit from sunshine in all but the darkest months of the year. It feels sheltered yet bright. Despite the sizeable extension the garden is still long, at about 24m (80ft).  The river Tolka abounds the property but is not visible thanks to high banking. On the hall return is the family bathroom. Painted a soothing green, another Crown colour called Up The Garden Path, it is smartly appointed and has a separate shower and freestanding bath. There are two doubles on the first floor. The main spans the width of the house and is painted a soft rose called Impala. The location is impressive, within a minute’s walk of the Botanic Gardens and its river walks along the Tolka; Griffith Park is just up the road, as are the playing fields and club spirit of Na Fianna GAA. Parents of small kids will love the fact that Glasnevin National School is just two doors up and Anderson’s Café, a sister of the Drumcondra branch, is at the end of the street. This impressive home in walk-in condition is seeking €725,000 through Sherry FitzGerald.