A major UK investor in Dilosk, the parent of ICS Mortgages, is looking into exiting the largest Irish non-bank mortgage lender after five years, according to sources. London-based investment firm Chenavari had built up a stake of as much as 30 per cent in Dilosk by the end of 2018, before selling down more than half of its holding last year. Joe Brennan has the details The pace of tech innovation in Ireland at present is just phenomenal, the founders of the Stripe payment processing company have said. John and Patrick Collison, speaking in Washington on Wednesday, were presented with the Science Foundation Ireland St Patrick’s Day Science medal by Taoiseach Micheál Martin. Martin Wall reports from Washington. The Federal Reserve raised interest rates for the first time since 2018 on Wednesday as the central bank struggles with soaring US inflation, the impact of the war in Ukraine and the coronavirus crisis. Colby Smith reports. Cantillon reckons that something big is happening in what was once East Germany and wonders if Intel’s ¤12 billion project injection is less than it seems. Karlin Lillington marvels at Ireland’s remarkable evolution as a global tech hub. Ciara O’Brien tells us that Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has increased the threat of a cyber attack and she also reviews the iPhone SE. In New Innovator Olive Keogh meets the company bringing the beautiful game to life for visually impaired fans. This week, ICS Mortgages increased its fixed interest rates for owner-occupier loans with immediate effect. On our Inside Business podcast presenter Ciarán Hancock speaks to Joe Brennan of The Irish Times about this development and whether other lenders might follow suit. Later on, Simon Carswell joins Ciarán again, to discuss the latest headaches for Irish aircraft lessors after the Kremlin passed a law re-registering foreign-owned aircraft in Russia. Stay up to date with all our business news: sign up to our business news alerts and our Business Today daily email news digest.