P&O Ferries has suspended all services and ordered its ships back to port as it announced it was making 800 staff redundant. Unions said the company had sacked all its UK sailors. The company operates a route between Dublin and Liverpool as well as from Cairnryan in Scotland to Larne; Dover to Calais; Hull to Rotterdam; and Liverpool to Dublin. The ferry company was directing passengers and freight to rival services on Thursday, but said in a statement: “P&O Ferries is not going into liquidation.” “Without these changes there is no future for P&O Ferries,” the company said. . The ferry group has almost 4,000 employees and operates more than 30,000 sailings a year . Nautilus, the seafarers’ trade union, said P&O had sacked the crew across its entire UK sailing fleet late on Thursday morning, and added that there had been no consultation or notice given to staff. The RMT union said it had instructed crew to stay on board the ferries and was concerned that British crew could be replaced by “foreign labour”. Karl Turner, the Labour MP for Hull East, where there is a P&O terminal, said “foreign crew” were waiting to board P&O’s Pride of Hull ferry to take over from the sacked British sailors. “They will not be boarding her,” he said in a message posted on Twitter. Downing Street said that transport officials were in urgent discussions with P&O to address the “live situation”. P&O did not respond to a request for comment on the future of its workforce, but earlier in the day said: “We have asked all ships to come alongside, in preparation for a company announcement. Until then, services from P&O will not be running and we are advising travellers of alternative arrangements.” In a message to staff seen by the Financial Times, the ferry operator said services had been suspended ahead of an announcement from its owner, DP World, “which will secure the long-term viability of P&O Ferries”. Passengers at Dover and Calais with bookings on Thursday morning sailings were being told to head to rival DFDS to travel. A government spokesman said the “Kent Resilience Forum” was also holding a meeting today amid concerns about the knock-on effect on the transport system. Nautilus said P&O’s actions were “nothing short of scandalous” and a “betrayal to British workers”. DP World, a Dubai-based container and logistics group, bought P&O Ferries for £322 million (€383 million) in 2019, and fired 1,100 workers early in 2020 as the pandemic struck. The company faced criticism from unions and politicians in the UK for pushing ahead with a planned $330 million (€300 million) dividend payout as it laid off staff and took government funding to keep freight services running. – Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2022; Reuters