Tributes have been paid to singer-songwriter Pete St John who passed away on Saturday. The folk musician passed away peacefully at Beaumont Hospital in Dublin aged 90. Born Peter Mooney in 1932, Pete St John is best known for writing songs including The Fields of Athenry and The Rare Ould Times. His songs have been recorded by The Dubliners, Mary Black, Daniel O’Donnell, Brendan Shine and many others. He also penned The Ferryman, Luke Kelly’s Land and Ringsend Rose. In a tweet, the folk band The Wolf Tones said his legacy “will endure” for centuries. “Our condolences to the family, friends and fans of an Irish songwriting great, Pete St. John. Pete’s legacy will endure for centuries to come. Ar dheis Dé go raibh a anam.” Composer Phil Coulter posted on Twitter: “Deeply saddened to hear the news of the passing of the great Pete St John, a gentleman, a proud Dub and a proper songwriter who contributed at least three classics to the Great Irish Songbook. Ar dheis De go rabh a anam dilis.” Singer Derek Ryan also tweeted: “I’m very saddened to hear of the passing of Irish music Legend Pete St. John. I can only aspire to write the magical songs that he has left us with. They will live on forever. I was honoured to record ‘The Ferryman’ and ‘Dreamers & Believers’. Thank you for the music. R.I.P.” Poignancy In a statement, President Michael D Higgins said it was noteworthy that Pete died on the day of the Ireland match and said The Fields of Athenry would take on “particular poignancy” “Pete had the rare gift of being able to write songs that while new and original creations, immediately assumed a timeless quality and central place in all our lives. It is hard to imagine a world where songs like The Rare Ould Times did not exist and in his work Pete has left us with songs that not only defined his own career, but those of many other musicians and indeed all of us as a people,” he said. “Pete was a close friend of Sabina and myself over many years and it was an honour to host him in Áras an Uachtaráin in June 2019 where he performed his song on environmental awareness, ‘Waltzing on Borrowed Time’. That was reflective of the deep care and concern which Pete had throughout his work in protecting and preserving the vital things in our world,” President Higgins said. “ We will all miss this lovely engaged caring man, none more than who had the privilege of knowing him as an indomitable source of inspiration and song. Pete St John is survived by his sons Kieron and Brian Mooney and was predeceased by his wife Susan.