Tuesday March 15th 1.30pm - Sky Bet Supreme Novices Hurdle Sir Gerhard (W Mullins): 2-1 (favourite) Dysart Dynamo (W Mullins): 7-2 Mighty Potter (G Elliott): 8-1 Kilcruit (W Mullins): 7-1 El Fabiolo (W Mullins): 20-1 Three Stripe Life (G Elliott): 16-1 Willie Mullins has won the festival opener five times in the last nine years and is pursuing a ninth win overall. The big question for some time has been with which star, Sir Gerhard or Dystart Dynamo? There’s a lot riding on this race for the cross-channel team with Nicky Henderson supplying Constitution Hill and Jonbon. No home win here will be ominous for British morale, which was left in shreds after last year’s drubbing. Three Stripe Life has been mixed without success at the top level but is likely to relish the final hill. 2.10pm - Sporting Life Arkle Trophy Blue Lord (W Mullins): 7-2 Riviere D’etel (G Elliott): 10-3 Haut En Couleurs (W Mullins): 7-1 Saint Sam (W Mullins): 8-1 Magic Daze (H De Bromhead): 12-1 Gabynako (G Cromwell): 20-1 Coeur Sublime (H De Bromhead): 16-1 Another big home hope here as Edwardstone brings a faultless novice record. It’s disappointing that there’s no clash with the exciting Ferny Hollow but Blue Lord steps in as the Mullins number one. He edged out Riviere D’etel in the Irish Arkle, although the latter’s final fence error could have been decisive. The invaluable sex allowance could prove to be the vital element this time. 2.50pm- Ultima Handicap Chase Death Duty (G Elliott): 15-2 Floueur (G Elliott): 10-1 Noble Yeats (E Mullins): 8-1 School Boy Hours (N Meade): 12-1 Not a happy hunting ground for Irish runners with no raider emerging on top in the last decade. Gordon Elliott is heavily represented in handicaps throughout the week and has pointed out Death Duty as being reasonably handicapped. A former grade one winner over hurdles and fences, his career has been injury plagued but he showed he retains plenty of ability with a National Trial victory at Punchestown last time out. 3.30pm - Unibet Champion Hurdle Appreciate It (W Mullins): 7-2 Teahupoo (G Elliott): 7-1 Honeysuckle (H De Bromhead): 1-2 (favourite) Zanahiyr (G Elliott): 16-1 Unbeaten in 14 starts, including last year’s championship, Honeysuckle is the standout hurdler of her generation. Armed with the seven pound sex allowance, it’s all but impossible to make a logical case for any of her opposition should she be in peak form. Teahupoo is something of a ‘dark horse’ in terms of his progressive profile. Appreciate It faces a massive task on what will be a seasonal debut. 4.10pm - Close Bros Mares Hurdle Telmesomethinggirl (H De Bromhead): 3-1 (favourite) Queens Brook (G Elliott): 11-2 Stormy Ireland (W Mullins): 6-1 Heaven Help Us (P Hennessy): 10-1 Royal Kahala (P Fahey): 7-1 Mrs Milner (P Nolan): 9-1 Echoes In Rain ( W Mullins): 8-1 Willie Mullins has dominated this race with nine victories in 14 renewals, although the last of them was in 2018 through Benie Des Dieux. He has been making positive noises about Stormy Ireland’s chance in an open renewal. The trio of Telmesomethinggirl, Mrs Milner and Heaven Help Us all won at last year’s festival. Given very soft ground, Royal Kahala will be a significant player too. 4.50pm - Boodles Juvenile Handicap Hurdle Champion Green ( J O’Brien): 6-1 Britzka (G Elliott): 14-1 Ebasari (G Elliott): 16-1 Gaelic Warrior (W Mullins): 2-1 (favourite) Hms Seahorse (P Nolan): 10-1 The Tide Turns (G Elliott): 11-2 Sea Sessions (R O’Sullivan): 20-1 Lunar Power (N Meade): 20-1 Gaelic Warrior appears to be the ultimate festival punt in the dark. Winless in three starts in his native France, he has yet to run for Willie Mullins. But come Tuesday evening he could look to have been let loose from a mark of 129. Bear in mind, however, that last year’s winner, Jeff Kidder, was an 80-1 shot and this is a race where favourites have a poor record overall. 5.30pm - Ukraine Appeal National Hunt Chase Run Wild Fred (G Elliott): 11-4 Vanillier (G Cromwell): 5-1 Stattler (W Mullins): 2-1 (favourite) Jungle Boogie (W Mullins): 10-1 Back to being an amateur rider race after last year’s behind closed doors action. Unchanged is Gordon Elliott’s influence. He has won the marathon event five times in the last decade including with Galvin a year ago. Run Wild Fred is hugely experienced and boasts grade one form. Stattler is comparatively unexposed but looks like he will relish the test. Vanillier won last year’s Albert Bartlett but hasn’t convinced so far over fences. Wednesday 16th March 1.30pm - Ballymore Novices Hurdle Journey With Me (H De Bromhead): 5-1 Sir Gerhard (W Mullins): 11-10 (favourite) Dysart Dynamo (W Mullins): 7-2 Whatdeawant (W Mullins): 20-1 Irish-trained winners for the last four years and the odds appear to favour that run continuing. Journey With Me in contrast hasn’t achieved nearly so much in terms of pattern form. However, he represents last year’s winning Bob Olinger team and is widely expected to step up noticeably when it counts. 2.10pm - Brown Advisory Novice Chase Capodanno (W Mullins): 10-1 Farouk D’alene (G Elliott): 12-1 Fury Road (G Elliott): 12-1 With Ireland’s top two novices, Bob Olinger and Galopin Des Champs, waiting for the following day’s opener, the way looks clear for Bravemansgame to try and live up to his tall reputation. Capodanno chased home Bob Olinger at Punchestown in January and briefly even looked to have him in trouble. However, Bravemansgame could have most to fear from another cross-channel hope, Ahoy Senor. 2.50pm - Coral Cup Drop The Anchor (P Fahy): 9-1 Deploy The Getaway (W Mullins): 12-1 Burning Victory (W Mullins): 12-1 State Man (W Mullins): 7-1 Good Time Jonny (T Martin): 12-1 Saint Felicien (G Elliott): 8-1 Favourites have a bad record in a handicap that often rewards unexposed rising talents rather than the hardy handicapper. Saint Felicien could be a case in point having had just two starts for Gordon Elliott since arriving from France. Burning Victory’s jumping has been questionable in the past and will come under pressure again. Good Time Jonny is in fine form. 3.30pm - Betway Queen Mother Champion Chase Chacun Pour Soi (W Mullins): 7-2 Energumene (W Mullins): 4-1 Put The Kettle On (H De Bromhead): 20-1 Envoi Allen (H De Bromhead): 16-1 Put The Kettle On is a defending champion widely ignored in consideration of what could turn out to be a classic clash. The home favourite Shishkin beat Energumene at Ascot in January despite circumstances conspiring against him at times. Now he has another Mullins star to beat as well in Chacun Pour Soi, who is impressive at home but vulnerable on his travels. Mullins is anxious to finally fill the one glaring gap on his big-race CV and is adopting a ‘less is more’ attitude to Chacun’s preparation. 4.10pm - Glenfarclas Cross Country Chase Delta Work (G Elliott): 4-1 Brahma Bull (W Mullins): 10-1 Prenegarde (E Bolger): 6-1 Midnight Maestro (E Bolger): 12-1 Shady Operator (E Bolger): 8-1 Tiger Roll (G Elliott): 6-4 (favourite) Perfect Cheltenham send-offs are rare but Tiger Roll could equal Quevega’s record of six festival victories and head off into the retirement sunset. Given decent ground conditions, the remarkable dual-Grand National hero is very much the one to beat despite his veteran status. His stable companion, Delta Work, could have his enthusiasm rekindled by the cross-country challenge. After all, it worked for Tiger Roll! 4.50pm - Grand Annual Handicap Chase Buddy Rich (G Elliott): 4-1 (favourite) Andy Dufresne (G Elliott): 9-1 A Wave Of The Sea (J O’Brien): 20-1 Gordon Elliott won with Chosen Mate in 2020 and his Buddy Rich has been prominent in the betting for some time. A progressive and relatively inexperienced profile appears best suited. 5.30pm - Weatherbys Champion Bumper Facile Vega (W Mullins): Evens (favourite) Redemption Day (W Mullins): 9-2 James’s Gate (W Mullins): 9-1 Madmansgame (W Mullins): 14-1 American Mike (G Elliott): 5-2 Willie Mullins dominates this race like no other with 11 victories already under his belt. He has a vintage looking bumper crop on his hands again. Facile Vega, a son of Quevega, earned rave reviews with his victory at the Dublin Racing Festival. Even Nicky Henderson believes he’s home and hosed already. However, there is plenty evidence of the apparent Mullins number one blowing out. Redemption Day has a big reputation while James’s Gate looks naturally speedy. American Mike has a major reputation too and a head-to-head up the hill with Facile Vega would be spectacular. Thursday March 17th 1.30pm - Turners Novice Chase Bob Olinger (H De Bromhead): 9-10 (favourite) Galopin Des Champs (W Mullins): 6-5 Perhaps the most eagerly awaited clash at the festival between the two unbeaten Irish novice chasers with the racing world at their feet. Consensus appears to be growing that ‘Galopin’ is better over his fences while ‘Bob’ has the better engine between the obstacles. It could come down to tiny margins between horses that are already first and second favourite for next year’s Gold Cup. But jumping really is the name of the game. 2.10pm - Pertemps Final Dunboyne (G Elliott): 17-2 Folcano ( G Elliott): 10-1 Sire Du Berlais (G Elliott): 7-1 The Big Galloper (C Byrnes): 8-1 Winter Fog (E Mullins): 9-2 (favourite) A Great View (D Cullen): 12-1 Tullybeg (G Elliott): 10-1 Panda Boy (M Brassil): 16-1 Gordon Elliott has won it three times in the last four years and his dual-scorer Sire Du Berlais is back for more off top weight. His class makes him a player again. Stable companion Dunboyne has developed an unfortunate habit of meeting trouble in his races but will relish the stamina test. Winter Fog has been a ‘buzz horse’ for sometime while The Big Galloper was an eye-catching winner in Musselburgh last time and could get into the race. 2.50pm - Ryanair Chase Allaho ( W Mullins): 4-6 (favourite) Janidil ( W Mullins): 12-1 A race that revolves around last year’s winner Allaho who will try to emulate the only dual-winner Albertas Run (2010-11). His front-running rout was one of the most spectacular performances at the 2021 festival. Two races this season suggest a horse that might even be better now. Allaho is all but impossible to oppose and his trainer’s idea of his best chance of the week. 3.30pm - Paddy Power Stayers Hurdle Cilaos Emery (W Mullins): 25-1 Klassical Dream (W Mullins): 4-1 Flooring Porter (G Cromwell): 7-2 (favourite) Flooring Porter bids to become the first since Big Bucks a decade ago to successfully defend the Stayers crown. He proved a revelation in 2021 under an inspired Danny Mullins ride. The jockey might like to have his Christmas effort all over again as Klassical Dream got a flying start on him and proved impossible to peg back. The latter flopped at Gowran last time. A strong home team includes another former winner, Paisley Park, and the dangerous looking Thyme Hill. 4.10pm - Paddy Power Plate The Shunter (E Mullins): 12-1 Busselton (J O’Brien): 10-1 Birchdale (E Bolger): 6-1 Grand Paradis (G Elliott): 12-1 A race formerly known as the Mildmay of Flete, The Shunter last year continued the pattern of success for either novices or horses in their second season over fences. The Storyteller was successful in 2018 but it’s traditionally not a race with an outstanding record for Irish horses. Birchdale bounced back to form at the Dublin Racing Festival but still hasn’t many miles on the clock. 4.50pm - Parnell Properties Dawn Run Mares Novice Hurdle Brandy Love (W Mullins): 3-1 Statuaire (W Mullins): 12-1 Heia (W Mullins): 14-1 Dinoblue (W Mullins): 5-2 (favourite) Grangee (W Mullins): 7-1 Party Central (G Elliott): 5-1 Impervious (C Murphy): 8-1 Mighty Blue (J O’Brien): 14-1 Choice of Words (M Brassil)….12-1 Willie Mullins has won five of the six editions of this race. Henry De Bromhead brought his domination to a close last year with a 1-2 result, but Mullins is back in strength. Brandy Love finished runner up to a stable companion at Fairyhouse last time but ruined her chance by persistently veering left. She is going the correct way around this time. Dinoblue could hardly have won her only start any easier at Clonmel in January but concedes experience. 5.30pm - Fulke Walwyn Kim Muir Chase Ain’t That A Shame (H De Bromhead): 7-1 Champagne Platinum (E Bolger): 10-1 Frontal Assault (G Elliott): 4-1 (favourite) Smoking Gun (G Elliott): 6-1 Mister Fogpatches (P Fahy): 12-1 Rightplacerightime (E Mullins): 20-1 Another race where Gordon Elliott has a fine record with three victories. Last year’s winner, Mount Ida, was saddled by Denise Foster. Frontal Assault has been targeted at this amateur event for some time and the hugely experienced Rob James is booked to ride. Jamie Codd has an outstanding Kim Muir record with four wins of his own. Friday March 18th 1.30pm - JCB Triumph Hurdle It Etait Temps (W Mullins): 12-1 Fil Dor (G Elliott): 7-1 Vauban (W Mullins): 6-4 (favourite) Pied Piper (G Elliott): 5-2 Icare Allen (W Mullins): 10-1 A maiden hurdle at Punchestown on New Year’s Eve could be key. Pied Piper beat Vauban by half a length and left the Mullins team stunned. Vauban has since won a grade one at the Dublin Racing Festival. Pied Piper subsequently hosed up at Cheltenham. Vauban was very good on the flat and holds a class edge. Up the punishing final hill, however, Pied Piperâ’s stable companion Fil Dor could come into his own. 2.10pm - McCoy Contractors County Hurdle Echoes In Rain (W Mullins): 6-1 Top Bandit (G Elliott): 9-2 Slip Of The Tongue (P Roche): 12-1 Adamantly Chosen (W Mullins): 12-1 My Mate Mozzie (G Cromwell): 14-1 Call Me Lyreen (G Elliott): 16-1 Grand Jury (H De Bromhead): 16-1 A good race for Willie Mullins over the years with five wins. The all but guaranteed fast run two miles will suit Echoes In Rain. The trainer to beat over the last six years, however, is Nick Skelton with three victories. His big hope West Cork has been targeted at this ultra-competitive handicap and could prove the one to beat. My Mate Mozzie has touch of class but concedes experience. 2.50pm - Albert Bartlett Novice Hurdle Bardenstown Lad (J McConnell): 10-1 Eric Bloodaxe (J O’Brien): 16-1 Shantreusse (H De Bromhead): 9-1 The Nice Guy (W Mullins): 7-1 Hollow Games (G Elliott): 10-1 Falcon Eight (D Weld): 12-1 The marathon novice contest has seen four Irish winners in the last five years, including Minella Indo in 2020. His 50-1 starting price shows how big priced winners aren’t unusual. There have also been a pair of 33-1 winners in recent years. Shantreusse won a grade three at Clonmel that’s been a pointer to here in the past. 3.30pm - Boodles Gold Cup A Plus Tard (H De Bromhead): 5-2 (favourite) Al Boum Photo (W Mullins): 10-1 Galvin (G Elliott): 7-2 Minella Indo (H De Bromhead): 9-2 Conflated (G Elliott): 12-1 Tornado Flyer (W Mullins): 12-1 Last year’s first three home are back and Minella Indo has a history of peaking at the right time in Cheltenham. Both he and A Plus Tard run on the back of defeats but the De Bromhead stable appears to be back in better form. The new element is Galvin, winner of the National Hunt Chase last year, who edged out A Plus Tard over Christmas. Gordon Elliott, a winner with Don Cossack in 2016, is notably positive about his chances. Rarely has a King George winner been so ignored in the Gold Cup build-up but Tornado Flyer has to prove his stamina. 4.10pm - St James’s Place Hunters Chase Billaway (W Mullins): 5-2 (favourite) It Came To Pass (E O’Sullivan): 16-1 Winged Leader (D Christie): 5-1 Lord Schnitzel (D Queally): 12-1 Billaway will try to make it third time lucky having been beaten a nose by Porlock Bay last year and by It Came To Pass in 2020. He was well beaten by Winged Leader at Thurles in January but subsequently showed the benefit of that run at Naas when helped by first-time cheek-pieces. The big home hope Bob And Co is likely to emerge as a major rival. 4.50pm - Paddy Power Mares Chase Concertista (W Mullins): 11-4 Mount Ida (G Elliott): 5-2 Elimay (W Mullins): 9-4 (favourite) Gin On Lime (H De Bromhead): 12-1 Elimay will attempt to go one better than last year when edged out by Colreevy in an epic first renewal of this race. First-time cheek-pieces seemed to sharpen her up on her last start at Naas and Elimay’s experience could prove decisive at a course and distance that should be ideal. 5.30pm - Martin Pipe Handicap Hurdle Five O’Clock (W Mullins): 16-1 Indigo Breeze (G Elliott): 16-1 The Goffer (G Elliott): 12-1 Chemical Energy (G Elliott): 10-1 Banbridge (J O’Brien): 16-1 Just one favourite - Sir Des Champs in 2011 - has won in the 13 runnings of the conditional jockeys event. Willie Mullins has won it four times in all, including with Galopin Des Champs in 2021. Often throws up a top class horse that in hindsight was ‘thrown in’ here. Last year’s runner-up Langer Dan will try to buck that trend.