The Rehab Group, one of the State’s largest disability services provider, has confirmed that some data from their IT systems has been accessed externally. This comes after the group suffered a cyberattack on some of their computer systems two weeks ago. The Rehab Group informed the Data Protection Commission (DPC) that it had been the victim of a cyberattack at the time, and it updated the DPC of the new development yesterday. In a statement, the group said they asked a team of external experts to undertake a forensic investigation of the attack on their data servers. “This team of experts continue to work through the investigation and are supporting us to bring our systems safely back online. “In recent days, this ongoing investigation revealed that some data has been accessed externally from some of our systems,” the statement said. The Rehab Group’s Serious Incident Management Team is currently working with the experts to determine what data has been accessed, but it could potentially involve employees and people who use Rehab’s services. “We are working hard to ascertain to what extent the accessed data comprises personal data, and to whom such personal data may relate,” the group said. The group added that currently, there is no evidence that any data has been used inappropriately, and there is no evidence that some recently reported scams are linked to this cyberattack. “Unfortunately, these scams reflect the nature of the cyber-security environment we are operating in, where these events are becoming more commonplace,” they said. The group has also engaged with the National Garda Cyber Crime Bureau and the National Cyber Security Centre. The cyberattack has not resulted in any disruption to services, and the group said they will continue to update employees, people who use their services and key stakeholders. “We continue to urge everyone to take the usual precautions and never disclose personal details if they receive unsolicited contact from an unknown source,” the statement concluded.