Builders Sisk and Lagan have jointly won a €325 million civil engineering contract from State airports company DAA. DAA last year began seeking contractors to work on different elements of an investment plan to boost facilities at Dublin Airport. The company confirmed on Wednesday that it has a hired a joint venture between John Sisk and Lagan Aviation & Infrastructure to work on a series of projects in a deal more than €325 million. The partnership will upgrade pavement, drainage and electrical systems at Dublin’s boarding gate piers, aircraft stands, terminals, and the general airfield. The contract is part of a DAA’s ongoing Capital Investment Programme 2020+, meant to allow the airport cater for continued medium-term growth. In 2019 Dublin, Ireland’s biggest airport, handled a record 32.9 million passengers. DAA does not expect to recover that traffic for three to four years, but Dublin Airport will have flights to more than 200 destinations this year. Sisk and Lagan are among Ireland’s biggest building and civil engineering conractors. Lagan Aviation & Infrastructure recently completed projects at Knock, London City and London Southend airports. In 2019, Sisk built the Boeing Gold Hangar at Gatwick Airport in England, a specialised facility for heavy aircraft maintenance. Ultan McCloskey, DAA’s director of infrastructure, predicted that working with the pair would ensure the company completed its investment programme across Dublin Airport. Paul Brown, chief executive, John Sisk & Son, said the joint venture was delighted that DAA chose it for the work. Steve Turner, managing director, Lagan Aviation & Infrastructure, said the pair looked forward to working with the airports company and other stakeholders. Work continues on Dublin’s third runway, while the airport is also upgrading security screening for checked-in baggage. DAA kept the building schedule for its overall investment plans under review during the pandemic, as tough Government restrictions had hit travel. However, the State company began work that did not require heavy spending, including seeking planning permission and contractors for various projects. The Commission for Aviation Regulation approved Dublin Airport’s spending plans in 2020. DAA is also responsible for Cork Airport and has operations and investments in 16 countries around the world.