Ulster 48 Cardiff 12 Ulster went top of the URC table after a comprehensive seven-try thrashing of Cardiff with Ireland squad member Robert Baloucoune scoring two of the home side’s total. It was an annihilation on the scoreboard with James Hume, Stuart McCloskey, Nick Timoney, Aaron Sexton and Tom Stewart also touching down in a game which saw John Cooney and Jordi Murphy return from injury and Iain Henderson put in an 80 minute shift, while Stewart Moore splendidly rose to the occasion filling in at fullback. Ulster’s first attack of significance saw them cross the line after just seven minutes when Robert Baloucoune collected a Billy Burns cross-kick and sped through to touch down near the posts and allow Nathan Doak convert. Doak then slotted a penalty after Holly Davidson opted to show Willis Halaholo a yellow card for killing the ball in the Cardiff 22. And just short of the quarter of an hour mark, James Hume intercepted a Jarrod Evans pass after Josh Turnbull’s break to run virtually the length of the field to score. Doak again converted to put Ulster 17 points up. Cardiff then managed to stem Ulster’s early scoring momentum ahead of a period of stalemate though they ought to have had their own try only for Josh Turnbull to knock on when they opted for a tap and go under Ulster’s posts. Spurred back into life, the home side finished off the half in some style with their third try. Stuart McCloskey got over this time after Nick Timoney’s great line off Marcus Rea punctured the Cardiff first-up defence. Iain Henderson then carried closer to the line before McCloskey arrived at the base of the ruck, dummied, and surged through. Even though, Doak was unable to convert Ulster trooped off at the break 22-0 in front and looking well set for more. It was the visitors who scored first though in the second half when Kirby Myhill was put clear by Matthew Screech though Jarrod Evans, who began the move, missed the conversion. Timoney quickly responded and used his leg drive to smash his way over off a deft Hume offload, Doak converting the bonus point score. Baloucoune then had his second with a strong run after being put into space by Stewart Moore with John Cooney converting and try number six was scored by sub Aaron Sexton just after the hour, Cooney missing the conversion. Tom Stewart claimed number seven which Cooney converted before Cardiff’s James Ratti then crashed over late on for Cardiff with Ben Thomas converting. Then with the last move of the game, Hume had a second effort ruled out for an apparent forward pass. Ulster: S Moore; R Baloucoune, J Hume, S McCloskey, B Moxham; B Burns, N Doak; J McGrath, J Andrew, M Moore; A O’Connor, I Henderson (capt); J Murphy, Marcus Rea, N Timoney. Replacements: T Stewart for Andrew (56 mins), C Reid for J McGrath (h/t), G Milasinovich for Moore (57 mins), S Carter for O’Connor (57 mins), D Vermeulen for Murphy (53mins), J Cooney for Doak (50 mins), I Madigan for McCloskey (64 mins), A Sexton for Baloucoune (57 mins). Cardiff Rugby: H Amos; O Lane, R Lee-Lo, W Halaholo, A Summerhill; J Evans, L Williams; B Thyer, K Myhill, D Arhip; J Turnbull (capt), M Screech; E Jenkins, J Navidi, J Botham. Replacements: K Assiratti, for Myhill (57 mins), R Carré for Thyer (50 mins), W Davies-King for Arhip (42 mins), T Williams for L Williams (55 mins), J Ratti for Botham (57 mins), J Hill for L Williams (57 mins), B Thomas for Evans (59 mins), M Morgan for Halaholo (50 mins) Yellow card: Halaholo (12 mins) Referee: H Davidson (SRU)