Hollywood stars emulated the carpet by dressing in bright red for the 2022 Oscars. After two years of hybrid and virtual ceremonies due to Covid-related restrictions, the red carpet saw a return to bright colours and fun with fashion, for both men and women. Celebrities clamoured to wear sequins in all colours of the rainbow, while Irish actors Jessie Buckley and Caitríona Balfe opted for more understated, ethereal looks. Here are the highlights of the Academy Awards red carpet this year. Ariana DeBose took one of the biggest risks on the red carpet by wearing trousers, specifically a bright red Valentino pantsuit with a statement cape. Nominated for her role in The Power Of The Dog, Kirsten Dunst walked the red carpet with husband Jesse Plemons, who was also nominated, wearing a strapless red gown a subtle rose pattern. Flexing her eco-credentials, Dunst wore a vintage Christian Lacroix dress. Marvel hero Simu Liu was one of the few men wearing a bright colour on the red carpet, in a fire engine red Versace suit. Tracee Ellis Ross is an old hand when it comes to the Oscars, she has been walking the red carpet with her mother Diana Ross since the early 90s. This year Ross paid homage to the dancing emoji in a fire engine red dress by Carolina Herrera, with a daringly sculpted neckline and drop waist. The neckline of Jennifer Garner’s classic red dress was reminiscent of the gown Julia Roberts wore as Vivian in 1990 film Pretty Woman. Designer Christian Siriano is responsible for Rosie Perez’s elegant gown, he posted a picture of the Do The Right Thing actor on Instagram with the caption: ‘A Rose for Rosie’. Lupita Nyong’o scooped an Oscar back in 2014 wearing a pale blue Prada gown and she chose to wear the Italian brand again, this time a golden long-sleeved dress with a textural skirt and unusual pink spots on the bodice. Continuing with the trend of statement sequins was Zendaya, wearing a silver skirt and satin shirt by Valentino. This is swiftly becoming a favourite silhouette of Zendaya’s: a high-waisted skirt and a super crop top, to show off an ample amount of abs. The Power of the Dog actor Kodi Smit-McPhee wore a baby blue Bottega suit, styled with Cartier jewellery. Irish actor Caitríona Balfe wore a custom white Louis Vuitton dress featuring a column gown, a flowing ruffle detail and spaghetti straps. Her look was accessorised with a diamond necklace shaped like a bowtie from Van Cleef & Arpels. Jessie Buckley opted for a more understated and edgy look, appearing in a flowing gown by Erdem in a shade of shell pink. British Vogue said Buckley's dress was inspired by "one of the coolest Oscar looks of all time", a vintage dress worn by Martha Plimpton when she attended the 1989 Academy Awards with River Phoenix. Old friends Jamie Dornan and Andrew Garfield shared a moment on the red carpet. Garfield wore a red velvet Saint Laurent jacket, while Belfast actor Dornan donned the classic black tuxedo look. Kenneth Branagh, who won the best original screenplay Oscar for Belfast, wore a classic navy three-piece suit. Jessica Chastain floated down the red carpet in a glittering Gucci gown, with a gold bodice ombre’d into a purple skirt and ruffle detailing. Alana Haim kept things simple and elegant on the red carpet in a silver scalloped gown with long sleeves and her hair and make-up kept natural. Timothée Chalamet wore a cropped jacket overlaid with shiny lace, which, according to the Guardian, was from Louis Vuitton’s 2022 spring womenswear collection. Naomi Scott wore a deep purple Fendi gown with a cape, high neckline and bejewelled detailing. King Richard star Demi Singleton continued her successful run of Miu Miu outfits, wearing a playful strapless column dress with whimsical sequinned detailing. Venus Williams was ethereal in an all-white Elie Saab gown with silver accents. You cannot go wrong with Dior, and Olivia Colman kept things simple and elegant in a silver gown by the French label with statement sleeves. Maggie Gyllenhaal’s Schiaparelli outfit was all about the gold detailing: unique sparkling buttons made to look like Surrealist ears. Tiffany Haddish chose to wear a custom Dolce & Gabbana strapless gown in green and silver. – PA