Confirmation from Damian de Allende that he is leaving Munster at the end of the season hardly comes as a surprise. It was always felt that the 30-year-old Springboks World Cup winner would finish his stay after two seasons and most likely head back to club rugby in Japan. A rugby player’s career is short and not especially remunerative for what they give to the sport, so good luck to him. It was also refreshing to hear a straight answer to a straight question as to his future. “I’m not staying, but it hasn’t been confirmed where I’m going. I’m not staying in Europe, so I’m definitely not going to Bath. I haven’t spoken to anyone at Bath. “I will not be staying in Europe as of the end of the season, which is unfortunate, but I’m looking forward to ending the season on a high, but I really want to leave Munster with great memories I’ve made already, but some silverware as well.” Asked what he’ll miss the most when he moves on and he responded: “Well, definitely the players. I have spent a lot of time with the players obviously. I’ve enjoyed Ireland as a country as well. Obviously I would have loved to have done a bit more than what I have done but Covid held it back. “It’s always a bit scary coming to a different country but the ways the guys accepted me and the amount of rugby knowledge I have gained through the coaches and the players I think has been pretty awesome as well. Yeah, I will probably miss the players and the coaches the most.” Then he added with a smile: “And probably Guinness, as the Guinness doesn’t taste as nice as it does in Ireland.” While there have been, and remain, bigger concerns in the world, it must have been particularly tough for players from overseas such as De Allende to arrive in the midst of a pandemic. For example, next Saturday’s URC clash with Leinster at Thomond Park (kick-off 7pm) will be his sixth match against the four-in-a-row champions and table toppers, yet the first in front of supporters. He has just made a timely return from an abdominal injury which sidelined him for over two months, what with the Leinster game preceding the European Last 16 two-legged tie against Exeter prior to another derby against second-placed Ulster. De Allende believes the team has progressed this season and can continue to do so over the next “intense” block of games. “It will be very challenging but I think us as a group are more than capable of handling these weeks coming up and I’m really looking forward to the challenges.” The Pro 14 final against Leinster a week after the conclusion of last season’s Six Nations provides particular resonance for Munster, with De Allende conceding that the team played with too much fear of making mistakes in the 16-6 defeat. “We chatted about it as players, I think sometimes we just maybe creep into our shells when it should just be another game where we can express ourselves again and try to execute like we have been doing the last few months. “Obviously we are going to make mistakes in games. I don’t think there’s a team in this world can play a perfect game so, yeah, we’re really just looking forward to the opportunity. “Not to say that we’re going to throw the ball around like we’re playing sevens or anything like that but I think if we express ourselves on the field and we really enjoy the occasion it’s at least going to be special. I think we’re more than capable of handling what Leinster bring on Saturday.” Ultimately, ending Munster’s decade without silverware would, he admitted, be “incredible”. “It would be great for me but I think it would be special for a lot of guys who have been at the club for a very long time. Guys like Keith [Earls] and Pete [O’Mahony] and Killer [Dave Kilcoyne] and Conor [Murray]. “I know Keith and I think Conor have won a title when they first started but I think it would be a lot more special for them now to win it. Not that they are finishing off their careers any time soon but I think at this stage and the amount of effort they have put into Munster and Irish rugby, for guys like them it would be very incredible and I think it would be even more special. “But I would love to win something in Ireland and especially playing for Munster. Obviously I wanted to come and play in Europe and that’s why I came to Munster. I wanted to come to a team which was very professional and very competitive, not just in Ireland but in Europe as well. That, for me, would be incredible, and it would be nice to leave Ireland on a high like that.”