Russia is building up its forces in eastern Ukraine in readiness for a new wave of attacks in the breakaway Donbas region, Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said, as another attempt was being made to rescue trapped civilians and deliver aid to besieged Mariupol. Ukraine’s deputy prime minister Iryna Vereshchuk said on Thursday morning that a convoy of 45 buses were on their way to the city of Mariupol after the International Committee of the Red Cross confirmed Moscow had agreed to open a corridor from 10am local time for three hours. Previous attempts to organise safe passage have failed. Moscow denies targeting Ukrainian civilians in its five-week bombardment of the city. Donetsk includes the besieged port city of Mariupol, which has seen some of the war’s heaviest fighting and bombardment and where about 170,000 people are trapped with scarce food and water. A successful evacuation would build on Russian promises to draw down its forces in some areas before the planned resumption of peace talks on Friday. In an early morning video address, Mr Zelenskiy said Russia’s drawdown announcement had been forced upon the Kremlin by the fierce resistance of Ukraine’s armed forces. He added that his government was instead seeing “a build-up of Russian forces for new strikes on the Donbas” and preparing for that. The region encompasses two self-proclaimed “people’s republics” that Russia says it is helping to free from Ukrainian control. The leader of the self-proclaimed Donetsk People’s Republic, Denis Pushilin, said on Wednesday that offensive operations were intensifying. Despite the withdrawal claims, Russian forces have continued to bombard the northern city of Chernihiv and parts of the capital Kyiv. Peace talks Meanwhile, Russian president Vladimir Putin told Italian prime minister Mario Draghi that conditions were not yet in place for a ceasefire in Ukraine, Mr Draghi told a news conference on Thursday when asked about a telephone call with Putin the previous day. Mr Draghi also said Mr Putin told him that current gas contracts remained in force and that European firms will continue to pay in euros and dollars, rather than in roubles. “What I understood, but I may be wrong, is that the conversion of the payment . . is an internal matter of the Russian Federation, ” Mr Draghi said. The fate of Donbas, which Russia demands Ukraine cede to the separatists, was a topic of discussion at peace talks held on Tuesday in Istanbul. A senior Ukrainian negotiator said on Wednesday night that the talks would resume online on Friday. Mr Zelenskiy said the talks had produced nothing “concrete” while one of his senior aides said the Ukrainian leader could meet Mr Putin soon. The head of Ukraine’s negotiating team, Mykhailo Podolyak, said that Moscow was scrutinising proposals submitted by Kyiv in Istanbul that he believed could lead to a presidential peace summit between the pair. However, a Kremlin spokesman downplayed the hopes of an early breakthrough in the peace talks. Ceasefire Ukraine has sought a ceasefire without compromising on territory or sovereignty, although it has proposed adopting a neutral status in exchange for security guarantees. Russia opposes Ukraine joining Nato, the western military alliance, and has cited its potential membership as a reason for the invasion. Mr Zelenskiy also said in his TV address that he talked to US president Joe Biden for an hour on Wednesday during another “very active diplomatic day”. He said he thanked the Mr Biden for a new $1bn humanitarian aid package and an additional $500m in direct budget support. Mr Zelenskiy said: “The support of the United States is vital for us. And now it is especially important to lend a hand to Ukraine, to show all the power of the democratic world.” A possible shift in the military situation in Ukraine came as the head of Britain’s spy services agency claimed that Putin has been misinformed about the extent of Russian military failure in Ukraine because his advisers are too frightened to tell him the truth. Sir Jeremy Fleming, in a speech given in Australia on Thursday, said the Russian leader had misjudged the strength of Ukrainian resistance, the western response and the ability of his forces to deliver a rapid victory. Reserves The Biden administration is considering a plan to release approximately 1 million barrels of oil a day from US reserves for several months, in order to combat rising fuel prices exacerbated by the war in Ukraine. Germany has triggered the first stage of plans to ration power if the standoff with Russia over gas supplies and sanctions is not resolved. Moscow is demanding payment for energy be made in roubles, but this could undercut western sanctions on Russia and countries are under pressure not to go along with the Kremlin’s plan. Mr Zelenskiy was due to address the Australian parliament on Thursday. – Guardian and Reuters