Cork 1-27 Kilkenny 2-20 Cork’s pursuit of a first national league title since 1998, their 14th in all, gained further momentum with a four-point win over old rivals Kilkenny in an exciting semi-final in perfect conditions at Pairc Ui Chaoimh on Saturday night. An official crowd of 16,910 saw Cork finish strongly to qualify for their first decider since 2015 with a stunning Darragh Fitzgibbon goal, five minutes from the end of regulation time, the catalyst. The dynamic midfielder sped on to a well-judged pass by substitute Conor Cahalane to brush off a number of tackles before crashing a shot in off the body of goalkeeper Eoin Murphy. That edged Cork in front for only the second time in a high-scoring encounter at 1-23 to 2-18 and Conor Lehane, who took over the free-taking duties from the replaced Patrick Horgan, along with a Fitzgibbon point, shoved Cork five clear entering four minutes of injury-time. Cork goalkeeper Patrick Collins had the satisfaction of stopping a close-range free from Eoin Murphy in the final act. A couple of newcomers caught the eye for the winners, notably Ciaran Joyce at wing-back and Alan Connolly, scorer of 0-4, in the corner while the switch of Robert Downey to full-back for the second-half was also significant. For Kilkenny, defenders Mikey Butler and Mikey Carey, enhanced their reputations, but their attack faded in the last quarter, when the need was at its greatest. Early goal Kilkenny set out their stall from the throw-in and hit Cork with 1-4 inside six minutes, with Eoin Cody and Billy Ryan sharing the points. The goal came in the third minute, Paul Walsh’s pace setting up Martin Keoghan, who finished smartly before Cork settled. They were still five adrift after a quarter-of-an-hour, before slotting over five points without response, highlighted by Joyce and Connolly scores, though their vulnerability in defence almost led to the concession of a second goal. Walter Walsh’s effort however hit the inside of the upright and deflected away from the target. A Horgan free tied matters at 1-6 to 0-9 after 22 minutes and Kilkenny needed the brilliance of their goalkeeper to deny Conor Lehane with Horgan unable to capitalise with the rebound. But, a second goal duly arrived, with Kilkenny again pouncing after 30 minutes. Mikey Carey’s long delivery presented Keoghan with the opportunity to take on the Cork defence before rattling in his second goal. Kilkenny led by 2-12 to 0-14 at the interval with Cork reliant on Horgan’s placed ball accuracy to keep them in touch. The pattern continued on the resumption with the scores coming thick and fast, Alan Murphy set the tone within seconds of the resumption. Cork restored parity by the 45th minute with substitute Tim O’Mahony firing over from distance, his side’s fourth without response making it 0-20 to 2-14. Kilkenny rallied to edge two in front only for Horgan to cancel them out before being replaced and a Lehane free edged Cork ahead for the first time, 0-23 to 2-16. Back came the Cats but only before the late Cork surge with Fitzgibbon steering them over the line. Cork: P Collins; N O’Leary, D O’Leary, D Cahalane; R Downey, M Coleman, captain, C Joyce (0-1); D Fitzgibbon (1-3), G Millerick; R O’Flynn (0-1), S Barrett (0-1), C Lehane (1-6, three frees); A Connolly (0-4), P Horgan (0-9, eight frees), S Kingston (0-1). Subs: T O’Mahony (0-1) for D O’Leary, (half-time), S Harnedy for Barrett (46 mins), C Cahalane for Kingston (52 mins), J O’Connor for Horgan (59 mins). Kilkenny: E Murphy; M Butler, H Lawlor, C Delaney; M Carey, P Deegan, D Blanchfield (0-1); C Kenny (0-1), C Buckley (0-1); W Walsh, P Walsh (0-2), E Cody (0-4); B Ryan (0-4), M Keoghan (2-0), A Murphy (0-6, five frees). Subs: J Maher for Kenny (46 mins), J Donnelly (0-1) for Keoghan (60 mins), R Reid for Buckley (63 mins). Referee: S Stack (Clare).