Ferndale Court, a development in five acres of woodland that consists of townhouses, apartments and duplexes, was constructed in 2002. Located on the former CBS seminary site in Bray, the courtyard development has views to the Dublin Mountains and along the coast to Bray Head. Features that add character to the scheme include oriel windows, a clock tower and cobblelock pathways. Number 24 is home to Don Fleming and his wife Sandy. Don, who is a Tefl teacher and builder, met Sandy, who was working as a translator in Thailand, when he fell from a height of 60 feet, and ended up spending almost three years in hospital. She retrained as a physical therapist to help Don in his recovery and the couple moved to Ireland. They subsequently purchased Number 24 in 2020 for €369,950, according to the Property Price Register. Since then the pair have completely renovated the 120sq m (1,292sq ft) three-bedroom duplex. “Sandy has allergy issues, and we prefer wood flooring so we ripped out all the carpets.” The wood-effect laminate flooring is also much easier to clean – especially as the property is now home to the couple’s nine-month-old twin daughters, which is one of the reasons the pair are selling up. “We had no intention of ever selling, and thought it would be our forever home, but with the steps out front and double prams, buggies and all the stuff for the twins, we just need something simpler,” says Fleming. The couple engaged interior designer Kay Egginton to help redesign the house. “She was amazing and really thoughtful about the layout. There were things such as making sure the taps were in the centre of the bath – so the twins wouldn’t bang their heads at either end – and, also making sure there were no lips on the tiles to prevent tripping. They are really simple things, and you wouldn’t notice them, but they really make a big difference.” Egginton also chose bold on-trend colours for feature walls and all the bathrooms are brand new and in contemporary styles. The kitchen, as it was in perfect order, has been hand-painted so it feels new, and the property is really bright internally thanks to its south-facing balcony. The location is just over 3km from Enniskerry, so Powerscourt is nearby, as are Bray and Shankill for shopping. The couple have placed their home, in turnkey condition with a Ber of C3, on the market through Sherry FitzGerald seeking €420,000.