Undoubtedly the industry most impacted by the pandemic, key players from a wide range of event companies and organisation came together to celebrate their talent, effort, and accomplishments. Now in their 13th year, the Event Industry Awards saw 19 prestigious trophies handed out, with 36 companies represented at the ceremony held on October 27th. The winners were announced to a live, virtual audience hosted by broadcaster and comedian Colm O’Regan. Events like this are only made possible thanks to the generosity and support of sponsors. The Event Industry Awards are particularly thankful to their 2021 sponsors, which included AVC and Amarach Research. One of this year’s finalist’s was 1 Plus Events. managing director, Shea McNelis said; “In a year where our industry was last to open, it was nice to see some companies acknowledged.” Titan Experience & Leaders Lounge joined this year’s winners with their CEO, Eoin Conroy saying; “Leaders Lounge was developed to confront the global challenges presented by an ever-evolving business landscape. It is a forum for world-class leaders to give unique windows into their stories of leadership across sport and business. I’m extremely proud of our Leaders Lounge team as it continues to trailblaze and gain recognition from awards such as these.” The addition of a full online broadcast of the live event has added a new dimension to the awards ceremony. Entrants to the awards can now receive comprehensive video collateral of their engagement on the night which is of huge value in their own social media communications activity. Head of judging, Darragh Feirritear added, ‘We also now provide judges feedback reports which give finalists information on how their entries faired against their competitors. This data provides insights on where improvements are needed to win more consistently at the awards.’ The full list of the 2021 winners is: Best Live Corporate Event Winner: Irish Fest Best Live Public Event Winner: Airfield Christmas Experience 2020 Best Live Awards Ceremony Winner: 2019 Northern Ireland Health and Fitness Awards Best Virtual Brand Event Winner: CUPRA Formentor Irish Launch Best Virtual Charity or Cause-Related Event Winner: National Workplace Wellness Day Best Virtual Awards Ceremony Winner: ARIIX Awards 2020 Best Virtual Conference or Exhibition Winner: TYTalks21 Best Virtual Corporate Event Winner: PayPal All Together Gathering Best Virtual Public Event Winner: Leaders Lounge Best Virtual Audience Engagement Strategy Winner: Quarantini Cocktail Masterclass - CATCH Events Team Achievement Award Winner: Grooveyard Best Adaptation of an Existing Live Venue to Facilitate Virtual Events Winner: UCD O'Reilly Hall Best Hotel Event Venue Winner: Clontarf Castle Best Unique/Private Wedding Venue Winner: Luttrellstown Castle Resort Best Event Infrastructure Provider Winner: Silk Road Tents Best AV Company Winner: Conference Services Best Event Management Company Winner: Grooveyard Best Virtual Event Winner: ARIIX Awards 2020 Best Live Event Winner: Airfield Christmas Experience 2020 The 2021 judging panel was comprised of: