Oil pushed higher as the US moved a step closer to imposing a ban on Russian crude imports following its invasion of Ukraine, ratcheting up economic pressure on president Vladimir Putin. Futures in New York rose near $123 (€113) a barrel after settling at the highest level since 2008 on Monday. The fallout from the war has upended markets, driving everything from wheat to nickel and natural gas higher and leaving the world bracing for an inflationary shock. Oil has rallied more than 30 per cent since the invasion and traders and banks are betting prices will keep climbing. Key US lawmakers announced the outline of bipartisan legislation to bar oil imports into the US, while European Union governments are divided about whether to join the action. TotalEnergies SE became the first big oil company to publicly say its traders will no longer buy Russian crude, though most buyers are already shunning its supplies, resulting in an embargo in all but name. US secretary of state Antony Blinken told NBC over the weekend that the White House was in “very active discussions” with Europe about the crude ban, sending the market into a frenzy on Monday. Oil had its biggest daily swing ever, with global benchmark Brent surging to nearly $140 a barrel. Surging oil prices and supply fears are also boosting fuel prices, with diesel futures in Europe and the US touching the highest levels in decades. American pump prices are just cents away from an all-time high set 14 years ago. OPEC secretary general Mohammad Barkindo warned that the world doesn’t have sufficient oil-production capacity to replace Russia’s contribution to crude markets, according to remarks at CERAWeek by SandP Global in Houston. At the same event, Chevron chief executive Mike Wirth said that there’s no evidence of physical oil or gas shortages yet. “The question of what will drive oil lower and when will we know if demand destruction is setting in is becoming a far more topical and relevant conversation,” said Stephen Innes, managing partner at SPI Asset Management Pte. “Disruptions to energy markets and the possibility of a geopolitical paradigm shift make for a highly unpredictable environment.” Brent remains in deep backwardation, a bullish market structure where prompt contracts are more expensive than later-dated ones, highlighting the very tight supply backdrop. The global benchmark’s prompt spread was $4.41 a barrel, compared with $1.39 at the start of last month. Some cracks are starting to show across oil markets as soaring costs begin to bite. Plastic makers in Asia are reducing activity, while refiners in the region are considering cuts to processing. Freight rates have also surged, adding to increasing pressure on refiners that had just recovered from the pandemic. - Bloomberg