The Irish ambassador to Washington Dan Mulhall is to become global distinguished professor in Irish studies at New York University (NYU) next September. Mr Mulhall is to retire from the Department of Foreign Affairs in August following a 44-year career as a diplomat. He is also a published author and most recently his book “Ulysses: A Reader’s Odyssey” was a bestseller in Ireland this year. Mr Mulhall will teach an undergraduate seminar, “Literature as History: Ireland 1880-1940.” NYU president Andrew Hamilton said: “We are delighted that Ambassador Mulhall will become a global distinguished professor at NYU in the fall (autumn). He has been at the forefront of European and American politics for many years and will bring valuable insights to our university regarding fast- moving geopolitical events around the world.” The Director of Glucksman Ireland House NYU, Professor Kevin Kenny said Mr Mulhall would “share with our students a deep and infectious knowledge of Irish history and literature, an extraordinary range of experience as a diplomat, and an unrivalled understanding of Ireland’s place in the contemporary world”. The chair of the advisory board of Glucksman Ireland House, Loretta Brennan Glucksman said Mr Mulhall would “greatly enhance our mission to teach, research, and engage with American audiences including the Irish-American diaspora in the United States”. She said he was “a popular lecturer on Joyce and Yeats, as well as on Irish history”. Mr Mulhall said on Wednesday: “As someone with a lifelong passion for Irish history and literature and a deep commitment to education, I welcome this wonderful opportunity to become global distinguished professor in Irish studies at NYU following my retirement as ambassador in September. NYU is the largest private university in America, and I have immense admiration for the great work being done at Glucksman Ireland House, which is one of the premier centres of Irish studies in the world, teaching hundreds of students from around the globe every year.” Prior to arriving in Washington in 2017, Mr Mulhall also served as Irish ambassador to Malaysia (2001-2005), Germany (2009-2013), and the United Kingdom (2013-2017).