Kerry 1-12 Mayo 0-14 Not so calmly, made plenty more jittery at times by the anticipated resistance, Kerry just about maintained their unbeaten league run and with that put some daylight on the rest of the country. Not for the first time or the last, David Clifford rescued them at the death, his free deep into the six minutes of injury-time putting them back in front after Mayo had made the most of a couple of self-inflicted Kerry errors to draw level. David Clifford finished with 0-6, four from play. Mayo might well have drawn level again, only for their last effort from Lee Keegan just drifting right and wide, their 10th of the contest. Match referee Brendan Cawley was set to restart, only by then the pitch invasion was underway and that was that. Kerry had a goal advantage at half-time, and what ultimately brought Mayo back into contention for the win were two moments of regret from Kerry; Paudie Clifford missed a sitter of a free on 55 minutes, and Mayo rallied hard from there, Ryan O’Donoghue immediately converting a free at the other end. Then, a Rob Hennelly free was retaken after Dara Moynihan was called for interference; O’Donoghue put that over too. Then they were level on 63 minutes, another free from O’Donoghue making for a frantic endgame, Kerry looking more nervous with every passing play. A David Clifford free briefly restored Kerry’s lead, before another free from O’Donoghue – this one hotly contested by Kerry – had the crowd in Austin Stack Park on their feet. When Kerry moved swiftly again, and replacement Stephen O’Brien was fouled, David Clifford made sure his free went clean between the posts. Mayo’s poor shooting throughout proved costly, Kerry handing them their first defeat in five league games to date, and the visitors can have no great complaints. On another damp night in Tralee, the misty rain steaming down off Slieve Mish for most of the first half, conditions weren’t ideal for any swagger. It also marked Kerry’s first league home win over Mayo since 2009, losing four and drawing one in between. Still the game only contained morsels of the unexpected, in between an unreasonable amount of turnovers. Kerry were missing the injured Seán O’Shea, and their attack clearly slackened as a result, a smashing first half goal by Tony Brosnan, a late replacement for the ill Paul Geaney, the highlight of the night. Mayo opened up into the wind, making early intentions clear: Aidan O’Shea made his first start at midfield, and after three minutes they had the opening score thanks to Matthew Ruane, before sending their next two shots wide. The advantage didn’t last long, Kerry promptly hitting top gear and scoring four points without reply, David Clifford getting the first with his opening touch of the ball. Brosnan was set up by David Clifford for his first, and even with the wind advantage Kerry were cutting straight through Mayo. O’Donoghue and Fergal Boland brought Mayo back in touch, only for Kerry to kick again. On 21 minutes, Brosnan started a great move towards goal, the ball then passing from David Clifford to Graham O’Sullivan, then back to Brosnan, who’s smashing shot went top of the left and well out of Hennelly’s reach. A superb goal. Kerry were killing Mayo with the turnover, minutes later Paudie Clifford stole possession from Jordan Flynn, before passing off to brother David who duly scored his second. Oisín Mullin could do little about it. That had Kerry 1-5 to 0-3 in front, untroubled it seemed by what Mayo had so far presented. Mayo did rally before half-time, Boland adding his second, and came close to a goal of their own on 35 minutes, Diarmuid O’Connor’s shot pushed wide by Shane Murphy. Hennelly converted the 45, and they headed in for the dry jerseys 1-6 to 0-6, Kerry’s goal advantage hardly reflecting their dominance. At times Kerry defended like demons, if demons played Gaelic football. Kerry manager Jack O’Connor has a thing about winning the league, working it into his preparations before his three All-Ireland wins over the years – his only intention for this year too. James Horan declined to make any match comment afterwards, in solidarity with the Gaelic Players Association threat of action if players are not reimbursed for expenses for all collective training sessions. Kerry only have Ulster opposition to come, Armagh away, before All-Ireland champions Tyrone come to Killarney. They’ll know what to expect. KERRY: S Murphy; D Casey, J Foley, T O’Sullivan; G O’Sullivan,T Morley, B Ó Beaglaoich; D O’Connor, J Barry (0-1); D Moynihan (0-1), J Savage (0-2, two frees), A Spillane; P Clifford, D Clifford (capt) (0-6, two frees), T Brosnan (1-2) Subs: S O’Brien for Spillane (45 mins), K Spillane for Savage (47), G Crowley for Casey (55), M Burns for P Clifford (66), P Warren for O’Sullivan (73). MAYO: R Hennelly (0-1, a 45); P O’Hora, O Mullin, M Plunkett; P Durcan, S Coen (capt), L Keegan; A O’Shea, J Flynn; M Ruane (0-2), D O’Connor, J Carney; F Boland (0-3), A Orme (0-1), R O’Donoghue (0-7, six frees, one mark). Subs: E Hession for Coen (half-time), K McLoughlin for Carney (42 mins), F Irwin for Orme (56), C Loftus for Boland (66), D McHugh for O’Connor (71 ). Referee: Brendan Cawley (Kildare).