Frank Casey, who died in December aged 95, had a long and productive life. He was managing director of ICC Bank (the State’s development bank) for 22 years until retirement in 1991. His time at ICC was one of great change and growth in Ireland’s industrial development. His approach to supporting Irish businesses, be they start-up, early stage or in difficulty, was characterised by a desire to help and pragmatic decision-making. As a result, many Irish businesses prospered from financial support from ICC which was often not available from other banks. Having confined itself almost entirely to industry in its early years, ICC Bank, under his direction, broadened its scope to include the distribution sector, the tourism industry and international consultancy. It increased significantly its venture capital and private equity investments. When few bank regulations existed, Frank had an innate sense of what was right and the importance of dealing fairly with clients. He led by example and combined a positive approach and good judgment with warmth, good humour and enthusiasm. He also had an uncanny talent of assessing the personality of people very quickly. He was well liked and respected by ICC staff and he knew every member by name. His vision and keen understanding of the needs of Irish business and leadership qualities enabled ICC to play a pivotal role in financing businesses to expand and avail of the opportunities arising from membership of the European Union and implementation of government programmes of economic expansion. Born in Dublin in 1926, he excelled at Synge Street school and at UCD, where he took two degrees at the same time in English and commerce, achieving first place, with CJ Haughey in second place. He was an active member of the Society of Vincent de Paul for more than 60 years, chairing its national finance committee in later years. He had a great fondness for music and was involved with the Royal Irish Academy of Music (he was awarded a rare honorary fellowship in 2016), the Irish Chamber Orchestra, National Chamber Choir and the Festival of Great Music in Irish Houses. His interests included cricket, of which he had an encyclopaedic knowledge. Frank Casey was a kind and considerate gentleman who treated everyone with respect and warmth. In a low-key way, reflecting his modesty, he made a significant contribution to the development of Irish businesses. Frank was married to Alison (née Holland) for almost 48 years. Her death at the end of 2020 was a heavy blow but he bore it with his usual stoicism. He is survived by his daughters Phillipa and Jane and four grandchildren. His first wife, Mimi Hurley, died in 1970.