Carlingford Road is a beautifully leafy road off Drumcondra Road Lower, which is lined with elegantly mature plane trees. The road has a variety of redbrick housing styles, and No 38 is at the Iona Avenue end. The two-bedroom terraced house has been smartly refurbished, with works carried out in 2013, when the owners installed pocket sliding doors between the living room and kitchen to open up the floor and make it dual aspect. So you now enter into a smart polished timber-floored hall and then through to the living area, where the same flooring is underfoot and the focal point of the room is its black cast-iron fireplace. The beauty of sliding doors is that you can open and close off a space as the mood takes you, so maybe in the morning you might like to have the rooms full of light, especially on early spring days. After dark there is something really comforting about being able to glide doors together to shut out the second room. The owners extended the kitchen into the northwest-facing garden, paving the floor with the same tiles that are a feature of the low-maintenance outdoor space. This links the interior with the exterior. There are raised beds for plants, and pedestrian rear access, which is really useful for parking bikes off the street. The units in the eat-in kitchen have a stylish two-tone colour scheme. They feature a mix of soft cream cupboards above the Italian marble countertop, which are framed by ultra-fashionable, anthracite-coloured units with brass handles. There is a large rooflight above the table. Off a small hall there is a smartly appointed shower room. Upstairs there are two bedrooms. The main is a Zen-like space that extends the width of the property, and there is a second shower room at this level. There is disc parking on street and access to a slew of bus services, many of which are cross-town, at the end of the street. Griffith Park is a short stroll away, as are the extensive grounds of the Botanic Gardens. Drumcondra train station, where the Maynooth commuter line will take you to Connolly station, is about a 10-minute walk. You can be on O’Connell Street in less than 20 minutes. The property, which has a BER C3, and extends to 96sq m (1,033sq ft), is asking €675,000 through agents Sherry FitzGerald.