The State is likely to be expected to take in over 100,000 Ukrainian refugees , Minister of State Anne Rabbitte has said. She said significant numbers could begin arriving within weeks or sooner. The UN said on Sunday that more than 1.5 million people have now fled Ukraine since the Russian invasion. Speaking following meetings with the World Health Organisation in Copenhagen last week, Ms Rabbitte said among those she met was Dr Hans Kluge, the organisation’s regional director for Europe. They met on Tuesday evening prior to his departure for Poland to assist in organising humanitarian corridors out of Ukraine. “At that stage over a million had crossed the border. He said he could see multiples of that crossing over. He went as far as to say he could see 4.5 million to 5 million or more crossing the border.” Such an exodus would represent “just 10 per cent of Ukrainian population” so numbers could exceed that quickly once humanitarian corridors were in place, she added. Ireland would be expected to take two per cent of those, if they were willing to come, she confirmed. “It is my understanding 671 people have arrived into Ireland from Ukraine but they have gone straight to family already living here. After that we are looking at finding accommodation for them. So that two per cent is likely to get very real, very quickly.” Minister for Children, Equality and Integration, Roderic O’Gorman and the Irish Red Cross are drawing up a register of offers of accommodation from the public, and such offers were “very genuine and generous” she said. However, she did not think they would meet the full extent of need, “once it starts to flow”. It would then be for authorities, locally and nationally, to identify accommodation. It is understood the focus will be on placing families outside major urban centres where the housing crisis is worst. Ms Rabbitte said she looked forwards to welcoming Ukrainians to her constituency in Galway east, adding their arrival would be positive for towns and villages especially those “facing rural decline”. Rural schools should start preparing to welcome Ukrainian children to their rolls, while local GPs and medical services, as well as local retailers and businesses, should anticipate increased demand for their services. Asked if significant numbers of Ukrainians could start arriving “within weeks”, she said “I’d say sooner”. “The most important thing is to keep this all flowing. We don’t want to see camps at the borders. We don’t want another Calais or what happened in Greece. It is important to keep that flow of people moving and to keep families together. Then you don’t have that pressure on services at the borders.” Dr Kluge, she said, was “extremely grateful” to Ireland for the humanitarian offers to the Ukrainian people. He had told her Ukraine was running out of life-sustaining supplies. “The hospitals are running out of oxygen and vital medicines. And the people are running out food. The longer this goes on, the more likely they are going to run out of food.” While many Ukrainian people would be unable to leave, and many may choose not too, “they will choose to move if they have no food”. Ms Rabbitte, Minister of State for Disabilities, was in Copenhagen leading a delegation from the Department of Health examining the role of assistive technology in supporting people with disabilities, and strengthening collaboration between Ireland and the WHO on disability issues. On Sunday passengers arriving into the State are no longer required to show proof of vaccination, recovery or a negative PCR test upon arrival nor are hey be required to fill out passenger locator forms . The Minister for Health made the move on Saturady to reduce obstacles for Ukrainians fleeing the war who are expected to arrive into the State in the coming days and weeks. Ireland is part of an EU-wide agreement to grant all Ukrainians fleeing the Russian invasion temporary residency.