Wexford 1-22 Offaly 2-12 A game that showed Rory O’Connor at his best as he inspired Wexford to an eventual but hard-earned seven-point victory over a battling Offaly outfit in this Allianz National Hurling League Division 1B game played at Chadwicks Wexford Park. Having been the in-form player through this league campaign, O’Connor turned on the style with an immaculate opening half as he struck 1-7, 1-1 from play. He continued his scoring exploits through the second period adding a further four points as the home side eventually shook off a dogged Offaly challenge. While Offaly will wonder when their luck will change, they will be more than pleased with this display as their injury-struck side were still very much in contention up to the closing 10 minutes when they trailed by just three points, 1-17 to 2-11. But there was little they could do as a flurry of late points saw the home side maintain their 100 per cent record, and are now looking forward to a top of the table clash with Cork in two weeks’ time. Those who braved the icy conditions were treated to an excellent opening 35 minutes, with Offaly getting off to a bright start when assisted by the breeze racing into a 0-3 to 0-1 lead inside the opening nine minutes. After Eoghan Parlon and Rory O’Connor (free) had exchanged opening points, further points from Luke O’Connor, coupled with a long-range pointed free from goalkeeper Stephen Corcoran, showed that Offaly were very much up for the challenge. The hosts were finding it difficult to get into their stride, relying on a further O’Connor pointed free to reduce the deficit. Offaly got a huge breakthrough after 18 minutes when full forward Paddy Clancy having got inside the defence and picked out Luke O’Connor with an inch-perfect pass, leaving the corner forward to beat goalkeeper James Lawlor with a rising shot to the corner of the net, giving his side a 1-3 to 0-2 lead. After O’Connor and Dee O’Keefe points had got the sides level, 1-3 to 0-6 , it was left to Rory O’Connor to drive through the Offaly defence with a tremendous run off the sideline before beating Corcoran with a tremendous finish, a score that helped his side to a 1-8 to 1-7 interval lead. Before Wexford had settled into the second half, Luke O’Connor with two points, one free, had Offaly back in front, but Wexford responded with points from a Rory O’Connor free, and sub Liam Óg McGovern. Then came a huge boost to Offaly when Luke O’Connor fired home a 47th- minute penalty after Parlon had been fouled, to restore their lead 2-9 to 1-10. Few would would seen Offaly in this position before the game, but once Wexford introduced some of their big guns from the bench, they pulled away, inspired by a glorious Rory O’Connor point off the sideline to maintain. WEXFORD: J Lawlor; S Reck, M O’Hanlon, C Devitt (0-1); G Bailey, D Reck, J O’Connor (0-1); K Foley (0-2), D O’Keeffe (0-1); C McGuckin, O Foley, C Hearne; R O’Connor (1-11, eight frees), C McDonald (0-2), R Higgins. Subs: C Byrne-Dunbar (0-1) for Higgins (41 mins), L Og McGovern (0-1) for McGuckin (43), C Flood (0-2) for Bailey (45), P Foley for McDonald (62), C Byrne for Hearne (66). OFFALY: S Corcoran (0-1 free); J Screeney, B Conneely, P Delaney; C Burke, D King, K Sampson; J Keenaghan (0-1), A Cleary (0-2); B Duignan, J Sampson, E Parlon (0-1); L Langton, P Clancy, L O’Connor (2-7, 1-0 pen, four frees). Subs: E Kelly for Delanbey (h-t), L Nolan for Duignan (48 mins), D Nally for Langton (62), P Cantwell for Clancy (67), M Watkins for Parlon (69). Referee: N Wall (Cork).