The number of teachers absent for Covid reasons has fallen significantly, new figures show. A total of 7,128 teachers were on Covid-related leave after testing positive or being identified as close contacts in February, down 50 per cent from a record-breaking 14,390 teachers in January. February’s Covid absences are the lowest recorded since October of last year. Education sources say the drop is likely to reflect a number of factors including lower infection rates in the community, changed rules on close contacts and the week-long mid-term break. Teachers’ unions, however, say Covid remains an issue of concern in schools and say the “dismantling” of public health supports means it is difficult to establish the true spread of the virus in classrooms. Since the return of schools following the mid-term on February 28th, students and staff are no longer required to wear face masks. Guidance issued to schools from the Department of Education states “in general schools should now resume normal school routines and normal teaching and learning activities”. The requirement for pods, social distancing and staggered breaks has been lifted, although infection prevention and control measures remain such as ventilation, hand hygiene measures and advice to stay at home if symptomatic. Teachers’ unions expressed concern and caution last week over the easing of face mask rules and social distancing. The Teachers’ Union of Ireland said the move could be “premature”, while the Association of Secondary Teachers in Ireland said it would “continue to urge caution”. The Irish National Teachers’ Organisation said it was extremely concerned for those with underlying health conditions and pregnant staff who were expected to work in “overcrowded settings, teaching the largest cohort of unventilated people in the country”. It said 100,000 children of school-going age have tested positive for Covid-19 since Christmas, with an average of 75 children under the age of 14 hospitalised every week. It has warned that the run-up to Easter will continue to prove challenging and disruptive for many primary and special schools. The union says it wants supply panels of substitute teachers to be expanded to areas not currently covered by the scheme. It is also seeking the fast-tracking of class-size reductions to bring Ireland into line with the rest of Europe, in conjunction with increased supports for children with additional needs and those whose learning was negatively impacted during the pandemic. The overall level of teacher absences, meanwhile, has also resulted in soaring spending on substitute teachers. It is estimated that the cost for substitute teachers in 2021 will be in the region of €300 million, up from €244 million the previous year. Minister for Education Norma Foley has said this enhanced substitute cover has played a key role in keeping schools open. At primary level a total of 680 teachers are employed on a full-time basis on teacher supply panels which cover about 2,700 schools. In addition, there have also been changes which permit teachers on career breaks to do unlimited substitution, as well as changes to allow job-sharing teachers carry out substitute work on the days they are rostered off.