Irish parents who were united with their baby, who was born to a surrogate mother in Ukraine, have thanked the country and its people for their help. The representative group Irish Families Through Surrogacy (IFTS) confirmed that four babies born through surrogacy in Kyiv have been safely evacuated out of Ukraine. Parents to one of the babies, Gavin and Lesley-Anne Grimes, said they were relieved to hold their baby girl, Tilly, and they were thankful to Ukraine and its people. Tilly and her parents will now make their way home to Ireland, and the couple said their new baby can’t wait to meet her big brother, Tadhg. “We want everyone to know what a truly amazing place it is and how wonderful the Ukrainian people are,” they said in a statement. “Our surrogate mother is safe and with her family.” The couple said they are in daily contact with her to offer support. “Our thoughts, prayers and love are with the people of Ukraine who have given so much to Ireland.” They also thanked the nurses and medical staff who took care of Tilly in the hospital, as well as their legal representation in Ukraine, Olga Danchenko. “Heartfelt thanks to the brave Ukrainian contractors who helped also. “All our wonderful family and friends for their love and support, but above all, our surrogate mother who is the most wonderful person.” The Grimes also thanked Senator Mary Seery Kearney, Minister Simon Coveney and his team at the Department of Foreign Affairs and Minister for Higher Education Simon Harris. IFTS said they were truly thankful that the babies are now safe in their parents arms. They said many of their members are in regular contact with their surrogate mothers, including those who already gave birth and those still expecting babies. Some Irish parents have transferred financial aid to their surrogate mothers so they can get to a safe place, according to IFTS, and this money can also provide provisions for the surrogate mothers’ families. “If surrogate mothers and their families wish to leave Ukraine, all assistance is being provided to help facilitate this,” IFTS said.