Leading heating solutions company Grant outlines all you need to know about heating your new build home. When choosing a heating system for your self-build project this is one of the most important decisions you make as – after all, it determines your comfort level and running costs of your home for years to come. Heat loss calculations At the starting point for your home heating system design journey, a calculation is required to highlight how much heat is needed for each room within the property. This is done using house plans and room by room heat loss calculations are carried out in line with SR:50 requirements. This information provides the heat load requirement for each room and helps to prove compliance with Part L of the building regulations and calculate the heat pump output, the hot water demands and underfloor heating and/or radiators for your home. Choosing your main heat source Once heat loss calculations are finalised and the heat load for each room within the property is known, the best suited heating products are sized and specified. When selecting these heating products, it is important that both your requirements at the time and requirements going forward are considered to ensure that the technologies selected can meet your changing heating needs in the future. Many self-builders throughout Ireland are choosing renewable technologies like heat pumps to be the main heat source for their home. This includes the A+++ rated Grant Aerona3 R32 air to water, air source heat pump which is a popular choice for new build homes as it can provide an energy efficient, sustainable, and cost-effective way to heat a home. The energy source used by a heat pump is electricity which can be renewable, so by installing a heat pump, homeowners can immediately reduce their carbon footprint. Although a heat pump will require more investment than a conventional fuel boiler, the running costs and comfort levels will be improved over time, provided that the house is adequately insulated. Choosing your hot water storage Once the heat source for the property is identified, a high performance, energy efficient hot water cylinder should be selected to support the system’s overall efficiency and work effectively with the air to water, air source heat pump. An example of this may be the Grant pre-plumbed cylinder range which is designed to heat water faster and more efficiently than standard cylinders and ensures that homeowners have hot water 24/7. These highly versatile cylinders can work effectively with an air to water air source heat pump and are configured for two heating zones but have options for two further heating zones and a domestic hot water zone. Selecting underfloor heating, aluminium radiators or both and temperature controls Underfloor heating and aluminium radiators are great choices to heat individual rooms in a new build home. Designed to effectively distribute heat within the home, modern heat emitters offer versatility to support the overall design and architecture of the space whilst also creating comfort. Underfloor heating works effectively with an air to water, air source heat pump, helping to save energy and money as both systems work at low temperatures to use less energy. In addition to providing a balance of warmth throughout a room, underfloor heating offers increased hygiene due to reduced air circulation and ensures more space to design and decorate a room without blocking radiators with furniture. The Grant Uflex underfloor heating system is ideal for new builds offering easy installation, optimal control with individual zone heating and comfort. The system is embedded in the floor construction and is designed specifically for individual areas. It is especially suited under tile and hardwood flooring in kitchens, bathrooms and open plan areas. A room’s look is an important consideration for homeowners and today’s market offers a range of options, broadening the horizons beyond traditional radiators. Aluminium radiators, such as the Grant Afinia range, are aesthetically pleasing, highly efficient and compatible with high and low temperature systems. They have excellent conductivity and with vertical and horizontal combinations available, deliver flexibility with installations. With the ability to expand these radiators from 6-20 panels, the Grant Afinia range offers easy installation and adaptability to suit the unique needs of the homeowner. Heating controls Installing smart heating controls to your home heating system can reduce energy usage by up to 20%. Without heating controls, you may find that you are incurring unnecessary energy wastage and have higher heating bills. This is due to the lack of control you have over the amount of heat you are using to heat your home and hot water. Fortunately, heating solutions company Grant supplies the necessary controls to operate their Grant Uflex underfloor heating and Grant Afinia radiators as efficiently as possible with the touch of a button. Launched in early 2021, the Neo system can be controlled by the neoApp, which is available to download on both Apple and Android smartphones. The neoApp is designed to work perfectly with the neoHub system, together they offer an advanced heating control solution that is perfect for modern property owners with ‘on-the-go’ lifestyles. The neoApp supports multi-location and multi-users, enabling homeowners to share full or restricted access to the neo system and control the central heating system from wherever they are. Having the ability to control a heating system from any location is vital in maximising a property’s energy efficiency. To ensure an environmentally friendly performance, the neo system and app include built-in geolocation technology. This technology ensures that users never waste energy in heating an empty house, by automatically reducing the temperature when a property is empty and increasing the temperature when the homeowners return. Home heating design service The good news is that Grant can make your home heating journey straightforward and hassle-free with their free of charge Home Heating Design Service. The Grant team has been helping new build projects throughout Ireland to meet compliance required under building regulations and design the best-suited home heating solution for homeowners. By working with the Grant technical specialists, self-builders can have their heating system designed free of charge and ensure their home heating investment is optimized to help achieve long-term financial and carbon savings. These benefits are delivered by a smart, bespoke integrated heating system, consisting of correctly sized heating technologies, designed with the unique needs of both you and your property in mind. Having delivered reliable, efficient home heating solutions for over four decades, Grant is a trusted partner for those working in the trade and their technical specialists work effectively with your appointed architects, BERs, specifiers, engineers, installers, electricians, suppliers and builders for each individual project. Take advantage of Grant’s free of charge Home Heating Design Service for new builds in 3 easy steps: Downloadable guides on how to heat your new build home are also available: Heating Guides Think Heating. Think Grant. Follow Grant on Facebook and Twitter @GrantIRL or Instagram @Grant_IRL.