That Irish Farmers Association (IFA) has warned the Government it would be “very unwise” to make any decisions on introducing compulsory crop growing before engaging fully with farmers. IFA President Tim Cullinan said that there has been no discussion with farmers on the matter. He was responding to media reports that Irish farmers may be required to grow crops in 2022 due to possible food shortages arising from the war in Ukraine. “It is far from certain that asking all farmers to plant crops is the best use of the resources that are likely to be available to us,” he said. “The biggest issue facing farmers is the rocketing cost and availability of inputs. This is where the Government needs to focus their efforts, as well as looking at some of their own regulations,” he said. The IFA has been invited to meet Minister for Agriculture, Food and the Marine Charlie McConalogue on the matter next Tuesday evening. “It would be very unwise of the Government to make any decisions on this before engaging fully with farmers,” Mr Cullinan said. “Irish farming is very different than it was in the 1940s. What was done then may not be the solution today,” he said. He was referring to compulsory tillage orders introduced by the government between 1939 and 1945 under which farmers with over 10 acres were required to grow crops, mainly wheat, on up to 20 per cent of their arable land. President of the Irish Creamery and Milk Suppliers Association (ICMSA) Pat McCormack said they would certainly engage with the Minister and his rapid response team on Tuesday. “There’s a lot of legislation put there as regards fertiliser usage etc. that will have to be overlooked in order for these crops to be grown in 2022 on farms. There’s a huge challenge to feed our animals for the winter ahead,” he said. “We’ll certainly enter there with the best form of faith to try and accomplish and make the best we can of a difficult situation,” he said of Tuesday’s meeting. “The availability of labour will be a huge issue as farmers attempt to diversify but we will approach it with an open mind and I think all farmers should be encouraged to do so but it has to be practically possible and it has to be viable and hopefully the infrastructure will be put in place to make it attainable,” he told RTE Radio One’s This Week programme. “We’ve been very fortunate to have had a reasonably short winter up to now. There were good stocks of silage there and I suppose I would encourage farmers, irrespective of their sector, to liaise with suitably qualified Ag advisers to be as efficient as they can and as prudent as they can with usage of fertiliser and indeed feed during the growing season,” he said. “What is of concern at this time is food security and maybe it’s something that the European Union, over the last decade or two and in particular during the last Cap reform, had lost sight of,” he said. Maeve Whyte, director general of the Irish Grain and Feed Association, said they “would of course welcome and increase in Irish food production but there is a need for clarity on what must be done.” There was a need “to listen to the farmers and what they say about feasibility. “ Overall she believed any plans to increase growth “should be part of a suite of measures which would need to be explored on Tuesday’s meetings and other later.” This could mean looking again “at EU regulations and at reducing the administrative burden when it comes to exports and imports,” she said. Above all “we should avoid causing any longer term damage” in what changes may be brought about, she said.