The weather will be “fair” today, Friday, before a weekend of long, warm sunshine, with temperatures getting close to the summer average. The best of the weather will be on Sunday with good long sunny spells developing across the country and high temperatures of up to to 17 degrees with light southeasterly breezes, according to Met Éireann. The national forecaster said Friday would see mist and fog early in the day, clearing quickly as the morning sunshine spreads across the country. Just a little scattered cloud is expected. By the afternoon, the day is set to become fine and pleasant with plenty of sunny spells. However Met Éireann did say there “may be the odd shower or two in Leinster with more scattered cloud at times in the north, amid temperatures rising to 17 degrees – about one degree below the annual average summer high. Saturday is expected to be “another rather pleasant day of clear and sunny spells with highs of 13 to 17 degrees and light winds” Met Éireann said. The outlook for Saturday night into Sunday is for a dry evening with good long clear spells, but a little more cloud will develop along the east coast. The winds will be light too allowing for mist and fog to form with lows of 1 to 4 degrees, Met Éireann said. Any mist and fog will clear early on Sunday morning as good long sunny spells develop with a little cloud appearing in the west. High temperatures will reach 17 degrees again. In the evening the clear skies will allow some mist and fog patches to form. Overnight lows will be 1 to 4 degrees with light winds. Conditions are expected to deteriorate from Monday however, with another calm and dry start followed by cloudy periods and sunny spells with some isolated showers developing. Winds will stay light with high temperatures of up to 16 degrees. Tuesday is expected to be more cloudy as the winds turn northerly and bring a cold change to the weather. It will be dry initially but a few showers will develop later in the day and temperatures will reach only 12 to 14 degrees in a northerly breeze Wednesday should see a further decline in conditions as cooler air blankets the country with scattered showers feeding down throughout the afternoon and evening. It is expected to be noticeably colder too with highs of 6 to 9 degrees in a brisk northerly wind.