Developers are seeking fast-track planning for 1,496 units at three locations across Dublin. Steeplefield is to lodge fast-track plans in the coming days for a 633-unit build-to-rent apartment scheme for Walkinstown. It has published a statutory notice that it intends to lodge Strategic Housing Development (SHD) plans for four blocks ranging in height from five to 12 storeys on the site of the former Chadwicks Builders Merchants south of Greenhills Road in Dublin 12. Scheme The scheme is made up of 292 one-bed, 280 two-bed and 61 three-bed apartments and is to include 10 commercial units and a childcare facility. Last year, the Steeplefield scheme underwent pre-planning consultation with An Bord Pleanála. The original scheme comprised 702 residential units but it has now been reduced in scale after the appeals board told the applicants that the plan required further consideration or amendment. In another SHD scheme planned for the South Dublin County Council administrative area, Kelland Homes and Durkan Estates Ireland are to lodge plans for 655 residential units at Boherboy, Saggart. In a published statutory notice, the two firms confirm that the development is to be made up of 257 houses, 152 duplex units and 246 one-, two- and three-bed apartments across nine blocks ranging in height from two to five storeys in height. Height In a separate SHD scheme, Lioncor Developments firm, Terenure Land Ltd has lodged fast-track plans for 208 units for a site located to the north and east of Ben Dunne’s Carlisle gym at Kimmage Road West in Dublin 12. The scheme is made up of 104 one-bed and 104 two-bed apartments across five blocks up to six storeys in height. As part of its Part V social housing obligations, the developer has put an indicative cost of €10.6 million on 21 units to be sold to Dublin City Council, at a cost of €668,155 for a two-bed unit. Planning documentation lodged with the scheme states that “overall, it is considered that the site is well located, and a highly accessible location well served by public transport, bike and walking facilities providing connection to the employment, commercial, health and education services within the vicinity and wider city”. A decision is expected on the application in July.