Eddie Dunbar heads into Wednesday’s stage two of the Settimana Internazionale Coppi e Bartali in Italy with his eyes on the race leader’s jersey, having finished a very strong second on Tuesday’s opening stage. The Irish Ineos Grenadiers rider attacked on the cat 2 Montefiore Conca climb, surging clear approximately 27 kilometres from the finish line. He crested the summit alone but was joined by the Swiss rider Mauro Schmid (Quick-Step Alpha Vinyl Team) on the descent. They worked well together to fend off a chase group, with Schmid then proving quickest in the sprint to the line. He finished two seconds clear of Dunbar, with 20 chasers a further 14 seconds back. Dunbar is a strong climber and is clearly coming into very good form. He has considerable natural ability but as a result of crashes and illnesses, including the bout of Covid which kept him out of last year’s Vuelta a España, is yet to fully deliver on his potential. The 25-year-old Corkman is in his final year of his current contract with Ineos Grenadiers and has said that this is a very important season for him. The race continues on Wednesday with a 165.9 kilometre stage to Longiano. This features constantly undulating terrain plus a finish ramp of more than a kilometre in length. Thursday’s stage to San Marino is even more difficult. It includes a first category climb, two second category ascents and a ten kilometre summit finish. With time bonuses factored in, Dunbar is six seconds behind Schmid and 16 seconds clear of the next riders. Settimana Internazionale Coppi e Bartali Italy (2.1) Stage 1 Riccione to Riccione: 1 Mauro Schmid (Quick-Step Alpha Vinyl Team) 164.6 kilometres in 4 hours 12 mins 58 secs, 2 E Dunbar (Ineos Grenadiers) 2, 3 E Hayter (Ineos Grenadiers) 16, 4 M van der Poel (Alpecin-Fenix), 5 N Tesfazion (Drone Hopper-Androni Giocattoli) General classification after stage 1: 1 Mauro Schmid (Quick-Step Alpha Vinyl Team) 4 hours 12’48”, 2 E Dunbar (Ineos Grenadiers) 6”, 3 E Hayter (Ineos Grenadiers) 22”, 4 M van der Poel (Alpecin-Fenix) 26”, 5 N Tesfazion (Drone Hopper-Androni Giocattoli) Points classification: 1 Mauro Schmid (Quick-Step Alpha Vinyl Team) 10, 2 E Dunbar (Ineos Grenadiers) 8, 3 E Hayter (Ineos Grenadiers) 6 Mountains classification: 1 Giovanni Bortoluzzi (Work Service - Vitalcare - Dynatek) 10, 2 E Dunbar (Ineos Grenadiers) 8, 3 M van der Poel (Alpecin-Fenix) 6 Young rider classification: 1 Mauro Schmid (Quick-Step Alpha Vinyl Team) 4 hours 12’48”, 2 E Hayter (Ineos Grenadiers) 22”, 3 N Tesfazion (Drone Hopper-Androni Giocattoli) 26”