Russia’s military will hold fire and open humanitarian corridors in several Ukrainian cities on Monday, the defence ministry said, after fighting halted weekend evacuation efforts and civilian casualties from Russia’s invasion mounted. The corridors will opened at 10am Moscow time (7am GMT) from the capital Kyiv as well as the cities of Kharkiv and Sumy and are being set up at the personal request of French president Emmanuel Macron, the ministry said. According to maps published by the RIA news agency, the corridor from Kyiv will lead to Russian ally Belarus, and civilians from Kharkiv will only have a corridor leading to Russia. Corridors from Mariupol and Sumy will lead both to other Ukrainian cities and to Russia. Those who want to leave Kyiv will also be able to be airlifted to Russia, the ministry said, adding it would use drones to monitor the evacuation. “Attempts by the Ukrainian side to deceive Russia and the whole civilised world... are useless this time,” the ministry said. Russia’s invasion has been condemned around the world, sent more than 1.5 million Ukrainians fleeing abroad, and triggered sweeping Western-led sanctions aimed at crippling the Russian economy. Oil prices soared to their highest levels since 2008 in Asian trade after the Biden administration said it was exploring banning imports of Russian oil. Russia provides 7 per cent of global supply. Japan, which counts Russia as its fifth-biggest supplier of crude oil, is also in discussion with the United States and European countries about possibly banning Russian oil imports, Kyodo News reported on Monday. Europe relies on Russia for crude oil and natural gas but has become more open to the idea of banning Russian products, a source familiar with the discussions told Reuters. Russian forces are converging on Kyiv, a city of 3 million, but have faced stiff resistance and have suffered heavy losses, according to Ukrainian authorities. The general staff of Ukraine’s armed forces said Russian forces were “beginning to accumulate resources for the storming of Kyiv”, after days of slow progress in their main advance on the capital, south from Belarus. About 200,000 people remained trapped in the besieged Black Sea port of Mariupol, most sleeping underground to escape more than six days of shelling by Russian forces that has cut off food, water, power and heating, according to the Ukrainian authorities. About half of the 400,000 people in the city were due to be evacuated on Sunday but that effort was aborted for a second day when a ceasefire plan collapsed as the sides accused each other of failing to stop shooting and shelling. Ukrainian authorities said on Monday the southern city of Mykolayiv was being shelled. Russian media cited pro-Russian separatists as saying an oil terminal in Luhansk was on fire after what they believe was a Ukrainian missile strike. Russia calls the campaign it launched on February 24th a “special military operation”. It has repeatedly denied attacking civilian areas and says it has no plans to occupy Ukraine. The civilian death toll from hostilities across Ukraine since Russia launched the invasion was 364, including more than 20 children, the United Nations said on Sunday, adding that hundreds were wounded. ‘Arc of autocracy’ US secretary of state Antony Blinken said the United States had seen credible reports of deliberate attacks on civilians and it was documenting them to support a potential war crimes investigation. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy warned Russians who committed atrocities against civilians they would face punishment. “For you there will be no peaceful place on this earth, except for the grave,” he said in a televised evening address. As anti-war protests took place around the world, Ukraine renewed its appeal to the West to toughen sanctions and also requested more weapons, including Russian-made planes. Moscow has warned that it will view any bid by the West to guard Ukraine’s airspace as an act of hostility, as the United States said it was seeking ways to help Poland provide warplanes to its neighbour and Kyiv pleaded for Nato help against Russian bombardment. Russia’s ground forces face fierce resistance from Ukraine’s troops 11 days after invading, but Moscow’s air power is inflicting a heavy toll on Ukrainian civilians and infrastructure such as schools and hospitals, as well as on military sites. Ukrainian officials said plans to evacuate 200,000 civilians from the port of Mariupol failed for a second day because of Russian shelling on Sunday, when missiles also destroyed Vinnytsia airport and hit Irpin, 25km from Kyiv, as residents tried to flee. At least three civilians were killed. “Eight missiles against our city, against our peaceful Vinnytsia, which has never posed a threat to Russia in any way. A brutal, cynical missile strike has completely destroyed the airport,” said Mr Zelenskiy. “We repeat every day: ‘Close the sky over Ukraine! ’ Close it for all Russian missiles, Russian combat aircraft, for all these terrorists... You can do it,” he added in a video address to western leaders. Mr Putin spoke to the leaders of France, Turkey and Israel but made clear he intended to continue an invasion of Ukraine that has killed thousands of people and displaced about 1.5 million. His attack on Ukraine – with the supposed aim of “denazifying” and “demilitarising” the pro-western democracy of 41 million people – has been accompanied by a further crackdown on dissent in Russia, where thousands have been arrested at anti-war protests. Pope Francis has sent two cardinals to Ukraine, where he said “rivers of blood and tears are flowing” – Additional reporting from Reuters