Barcelona were held to a 0-0 home draw by Galatasaray in the first leg of their Europa League last-16 tie on Thursday as Scottish side Rangers kept their momentum in the competition going with a 3-0 win over Red Star Belgrade. Barca bombarded Galatasaray with 14 goal attempts against only three from the Turkish side, who were indebted to 23-year-old Spanish goalkeeper Inaki Pena for several fine saves. Galatasaray also made good chances with winger Kerem Akturkoglu a constant threat to the Barca defence with his pace and range of skills. In Glasgow, Rangers scored twice in the first 15 minutes against Red Star through James Tavernier and Alfredo Morelos. Leon Balogun added the third in the second half. Following their shock win over Borussia Dortmund in the last round, Rangers will take a three-goal advantage into the second leg after Red Star forward Aleksandar Katai had two efforts ruled out by Var and missed a penalty late in the first half. In Bergamo, Atalanta fought back to beat Bayer Leverkusen 3-2 in a frantic match. Charles Aranguiz scored an early opener for the German side, but Colombian Luis Muriel set up Ukrainian Ruslan Malinovsky for the equaliser 15 minutes later. Malinovsky twice provided assists for Muriel to put Atalanta 3-1 ahead before Moussa Diaby pulled one back for Leverkusen. Braga defeated AS Monaco 2-0 thanks to goals from Abel Ruiz and Vitor Oliveira. In the conference league, Leicester have the upper hand against Rennes after the first leg of their last-16 tie as goals from Marc Albrighton and Kelechi Iheanacho secured a 2-0 win at the King Power Stadium. Albrighton put the Foxes in front in emphatic style on the half-hour mark, cracking the ball home from Harvey Barnes’ tee-up. Substitute Iheanacho then added a fine stoppage-time finish to secure Brendan Rodgers’ side a two-goal lead to take into next Thursday’s second leg in France. Rennes had notable chances but were unable to make the most of them, while Kasper Schmeichel made a good save to keep out a Martin Terrier shot with over 15 minutes to go to. Leicester then won a free-kick just in a dangerous position that Youri Tielemans fired into the wall, and as Rodgers’ men looked to apply further pressure, Wilfred Ndidi headed a corner wide. Four minutes later, they had the lead after Barnes burst down the left, got around a man, cut the ball back and Albrighton lashed it into the roof of the net from the edge of the box. Rennes had a chance to level just before the interval but Jonas Martin could not keep his shot down. And eight minutes into the second half there were penalty appeals from the visitors that proved in vain when Nayef Aguerd’s shot struck Caglar Soyuncu, with referee Orel Grinfeeld unmoved and Var not in use. Kiernan Dewsbury-Hall brought a save out of Alfred Gomis at the other end, before sending a further shot off-target. And the midfielder then saw a strike blocked after Leicester broke forward on the counter-attack in the 68th minute. Schmeichel was called into action in the 74th, doing well as he stuck out a boot to keep out Terrier’s shot, and Rennes substitute Flavien Tait sent an effort wide of the Dane’s post five minutes later. The Ligue 1 outfit were unable to muster much further, and Iheanacho then doubled Leicester’s advantage in time added on with a curling finish into the corner.