England 15 Ireland 32 Ireland made heavy weather of putting a 14-man English side to the sword, the concession of six scrum penalties reviving unhappy memories of the defeat here a decade ago. But having been dragged into a nervy arm wrestle at a raucous Twickenham, they held their nerve to pull away and earn a bonus-point win. Reduced to 14 men for all but the first two minutes, New England once again resorted to Old England, relying on a confrontational defence, that scrum wreckage and a route one aerial bombardment, and after a bright beginning New Ireland lost their way a little, committing any number of unforced handling errors in the opposition 22 when pushing the pass or offload. Ultimately, they were hugely indebted to the impact of their bench, all of whom had big involvements, and in the end even secured a bonus point which takes them to within two of France and keeps their title hopes alive. Hence, victory over Scotland at the Aviva Stadium will secure a Triple Crown while ensuring Les Bleus will then have to beat England too in order to win the title and the Grand Slam. There was also the brilliance of Hugo Keenan at the back, or otherwise Ireland might well have suffered a hugely damaging defeat. Jamison Gibson-Park was his livewire self and James Lowe had a big game, providing go-forward when often nothing seemed on. The class and workrate of Tadhg Beirne and Caelan Doris also shone through, and Ireland always looked the more potent side when the game was loose, or at any rate away from the scrum. This game, like so many others in the last two years of the Six Nations, hinged on a red card, as English lock Charlie Ewels was sent off in just the second minute. Ireland had been quick into their intricate and varied short-passing game when James Ryan completed an offload to Johnny Sexton on the wrap and was caught late and head-on-head by Ewels. The Twickenham crowd booed loudly when Mathieu Raynal brandished a red card but the 6’ 7” lock was very upright and ultimately reckless when making no attempt to lower his tackle. Given World Rugby’s understandable clampdown on high hits Raynal had no choice. More worrying and pertinent was the sight of Ryan wobbling as he failed to stay on his feet before being replaced permanently by Iain Henderson given his history of concussions. Eddie Jones likes his English side to bully their opponents and true to type had forewarned Ireland that they wouldn’t have experienced anything like England’s physicality in some time – he must have missed the France-Ireland game. But you had to wonder how much Jones’s demands on is team contributed to the red card. Ireland did carry on probing the English defence off lightening quick ball which initially prevented the home side applying line speed. They also drew first blood in the figurative sense and even had a second try over-ruled which would have made it 15-0 and given England a mountain to climb. However, they became increasingly rattled, not least due to the concession of three penalties for three wheeled scrums which contributed to a 9-3 first-half penalty count and 15-8 in total. Prior to kick-off, after the usual fireworks and before the ‘anthems’ there was a round of applause for the Ukrainian victims of that evil and senseless Russian invasion and a Ukraine Humanitarian Appeal, which was pretty ironic given the UK Government’s lamentable restrictions on permitting entry for refugees from that war-torn country. After the initial cacophony of booing for Ewels’s red card, during which Sexton kicked the ensuing penalty, a stunned hush becalmed the home crowd and Ireland maintained their attacking rhythm. The array of tip-ons, wraps, angled runs off the ball, short passes and long passes enabled them to reach the edge regularly, particularly on Lowe’s wing. Pulling the strings Gibson-Park went back to the left blindside with a skip pass to Dan Sheehan who linked deftly on his inside with Josh van der Flier to then send Lowe away for a fine finish. It looked like Doris had scored from Andrew Conway’s long pass but on review Raynal decreed that Garry Ringrose had knocked on when his arm was tugged by Maro Itoje when he flew over the ruck. Instead, the scrum woes and penalty count went up, the first of the former leading to Marcus Smith opening their count. Raynal and – surprise, surprise – Mike Adamson on the line missed a blatant forward pass by Joe Marchant to Sam Simmonds, who bumped Lowe, but a rock steady Irish defensive maul and some cute blindside work by Cian Healy led to Lowe clearing downfield. But Ireland weren’t helping themselves, Sexton being clearly in front of Ringrose’s kick for Smith to land another penalty, and whereas Itoje stayed bound in disrupting an Irish maul, Henderson did not, while the penalty he conceded when playing the ball on the deck for Smith’s three-pointer on half-time was just daft. By then at least Gibson-Park had injected some tempo with a couple of quick taps, and from the second the alert Keenan came from deep to blast through Jack Nowell’s tackle, so at least Ireland led 15-9 at the break. Ireland went for the jugular on the resumption after Lowe came in off his wing to break through on the edge of a ruck from Gibson-Park’s popped ball and the latter then tapped two more penalties inside the English 22. But attempted offloads by Lowe, Beirne and Tadhg Furlong didn’t go to hand. This was particularly costly as it led to more scrums, more penalties, more energy for the home team and more Swing Lows. When Keenan took another high kick, he was smashed by Freddie Steward and Marchant was cleared out to earn the penalty to make it 15-12 before Smith rewarded another scrum penalty to make it 15-all. A second, invaluable 50:22 of the half by Conway led to Ireland pounding England’s line, Rob Herring almost scoring off his line, before Sexton restored the lead. The game finally turned Ireland’s way again with a vital lineout steal by Beirne, against Itoje, and another superb take and counter by Keenan, and a line break by Doris after a tip inside by Beirne, although Doris’s offload went behind Conor Murray. The latter’s experience shone through and after Sexton worked his wrap for Keenan to brilliantly link with Ringrose and give Conway a run, Murray was on hand to fire a long flat pass for Jack Conan to score with a very good line. Suddenly the bonus point was in sight and after Lowe carried hard to the line when teed up by Murray off a good catch-and-drive, Finlay Bealham was on sharply on hand to burrow over low to the ground with a little help from the omnipresent Beirne. Rarely will Ireland win with an away bonus point against a big hitter like England – if ever again – and the abiding feeling was relief. SCORING SEQUENCE – 3 mins: Sexton pen 0-3; 6: Lowe try 0-8; 18: Smith pen 3-8; 32: Smith pen 6-8; 37: Keenan try, Sexton con 6-15; 40 (+1): Smith pen 9-15; (half-time 9-15); 53: Smith pen 12-15; 60: Smith pen 15-15; 66: Sexton pen 15-18; 72: Conan try, Sexton con 15-27; 76: Bealham try, Sexton con 15-32. ENGLAND: Freddie Steward (Leicester); Max Malins (Saracens), Joe Marchant (Harlequins), Henry Slade (Exeter), Jack Nowell (Exeter); Marcus Smith (Harlequins), Harry Randall (Bristol); Ellis Genge (Leicester), Jamie George (Saracens), Kyle Sinckler (Bristol); Maro Itoje (Saracens), Charlie Ewels (Bath); Courtney Lawes (Northampton, capt) Tom Curry (Sale), Sam Simmonds (Exeter). Replacements: Alex Dombrandt (Harlequins) for Curry (15), Will Stuart (Bath) for Sinckler (39), Ben Youngs (Leicester) for Randall (54), Joe Marler (Harlequins) for Genge, Joe Launchbury (Wasps) for Dombrandt (both 66), Elliot Daly (Saracens) for Marchant, Jamie Blamire (Newcastle) for George, George Ford (Leicester) for Smith (both 80). Sent-off: Ewels (2 mins). IRELAND: Hugo Keenan (Leinster); Andrew Conway (Munster), Garry Ringrose (Leinster), Bundee Aki (Connacht), James Lowe (Leinster); Johnny Sexton (Leinster, capt), Jamison Gibson Park (Leinster); Cian Healy (Leinster), Dan Sheehan (Leinster), Tadhg Furlong (Leinster); Tadhg Beirne (Munster), James Ryan (Leinster); Peter O’Mahony (Munster), Josh van der Flier (Leinster), Caelan Doris (Leinster), Replacements: Iain Henderson (Ulster) for Ryan (2 mins), Rob Herring (Ulster) for Sheehan, Dave Kilcoyne (Munster) for Healy (both 53), Jack Conan (Leinster) for O’Mahony (61), Robbie Henshaw (Leinster) for Aki (66), Conor Murray (Munster) for Gibson-Park (68), Finlay Bealham (Connacht) for Furlong (74), Joey Carbery (Munster) for Sexton (80). Referee: Mathieu Raynal (FFR)