Taking on Ireland at Twickenham in eight days’ time will be a ‘step up’ in the Six Nations for England, says the forwards coach, Richard Cockerill. After an opening defeat by Scotland and victories against Italy and Wales, Eddie Jones’s side are third in the table with two matches remaining. Andy Farrell’s Ireland sit second behind the leaders France, also with two wins out of three, but marginally ahead having scored three bonus points to England’s two. Ireland recorded an emphatic 57-6 victory against Italy last Sunday after the Azzurri were reduced to 13 men but their first-round fixture, a 29-7 demolition of Wales in Dublin, provides a more accurate reflection of the talent at Farrell’s disposal. Under the tutelage of the attack coach Mike Catt, Ireland aim to play a high-tempo attacking game, one in which their powerful forwards play a full part. “They’re a very good side, aren’t they?” Cockerill said yesterday. “They play a really good style of rugby, very physical, the way they carry the ball, and the way their forward pack go about their business. And their backs have been impressive. We’re looking forward to the game, but we know it’s going to be a step up from what we’ve played so far.” Cockerill is tasked with co-ordinating England’s pack against an accomplished Ireland front eight, although it emerged that the increasingly influential Leinster prop Andrew Porter will miss the rest of the Six Nations due to an ankle injury. According to Cockerill the set-piece may well decide the outcome of a Twickenham encounter that, if England win, would set up a tournament “final” against France in Paris on March 19th. Ireland finish their campaign at home against Scotland on the same day, and are aiming to be in contention for the championship by first winning in south-west London. “Ireland are very good at their set-piece and that’s going to be a real battle, both scrum and lineout,” Cockerill said. “That’s going to be where the game is probably won or lost. We know what they’re going to bring, and we aim to match that and make it a fierce contest.” England have frontrow injury problems of their own, with Exeter’s Luke Cowan-Dickie ruled out for the rest of the tournament after damaging knee ligaments in last weekend’s win against Wales. The hooker will potentially miss the rest of the domestic season, and Cockerill said: “Disappointed for himself and Exeter, and obviously ourselves. He’s a really important player to the team, a leader of the group as well, so it’s a bit of a blow.” In Jamie George, however, England have a more than adequate alternative, and Cockerill expects the Saracens hooker to prove his worth in the pivotal matches against Ireland and then France:. “He will be key with his experience,” he said. “When you’re in big games and you get real pressure on your game, experience is the thing that holds it together, and Jamie will bring that in bucketloads.” Cockerill had upbeat injury news on the backrower Tom Curry, who sustained a knock to the head against Wales, and the Exeter lock Jonny Hill, who has been sidelined since early January with an ankle stress fracture. “Tom’s going through normal return-to-play [concussion] protocols as any player would,” Cockerill said. “We expect him to come through that and be ready for training next week. Jonny Hill has taken full part in training both yesterday and today, so positive news on him . . . If he comes through training fully, with no reactions, there’s a good chance he’ll be available for selection.” A hamstring strain ruled the Sale centre Manu Tuilagi out of the Wales game at the last minute. Asked if he could recover in time to feature against France, Cockerill said: “Let’s see how he goes in the next couple of weeks. It’s a decision to be made at a different time.” – Guardian