The sentimental usually last as long in Cheltenham as innumerate bookies but thousands of eyes might get very teary indeed should Tiger Roll supply a fairytale finish to his superb career on Wednesday. Ryanair boss Michael O’Leary has indicted victory in the Glenfarclas Cross-Country Chase will spark immediate retirement for the veteran 12 year old. O’Leary’s own sentiment levels are famously low. So when he admits he views Tiger Roll as almost being like one of his children it speaks volumes for the impact this otherwise unremarkable looking little horse has made on the popular imagination. The name has helped of course. So has a physical ‘little guy’ stature that has overcome some giant rivals over the years. A total of 13 wins in 45 career starts isn’t too shabby either. But it has been the nature of the victories that means Tiger Roll faces his curtain-call enveloped in such affection. Back to back wins in the most famous race of all, the Aintree Grand National, guaranteed a rare profile among the general public. The racing public always warm to Cheltenham festival winners and Tiger Roll first struck here all of eight years ago in the Triumph Hurdle. There was a National Hunt Chase too in 2017. However it is the unique challenge of the cross-country that sees him chasing a fourth win in Wednesday’s race and a potential record-equaling sixth festival success in all. Quevega won the mares hurdle six years in a row but she was a festival star of the lesser spotted variety. Tiger Roll has been a fixture for much longer and familiarity has brought only adulation. That comes with its own tension. A total of 32 obstacles around a three and three quarter mile circuit makes for a stern challenge no matter who the horse. Tiger Roll has been foot-perfect four times in the past but there are never guarantees. Safe return As always, all 16 runners coming back safely will be the best result of all but Tiger Roll once more looks very much the one to beat. Once again he has warmed up with a spin over hurdles at Navan in January and, crucially, ground conditions look to have come in his favour. Widely written off as a back number before last year’s race, an 18 length rout of Easysland, who had beaten him on very soft ground in 2020, reminded everyone of how different a proposition Tiger Roll is when his hooves aren’t sinking. The Gigginstown colours are carried by three other runners and O’Leary’s contrarian instincts might be evident in how Tiger Roll’s biggest threat could just be his stable companion, Delta Work. A five-time Grade 1 winner, Delta Work is just the sort that might be rejuvenated by this challenge. But at heart it really looks to be all about one horse. The opening Ballymore Novice Hurdle could be a similar story. If Sir Gerhard stays the extended two and a half mile trip it’s difficult to escape from him as the winner. Ordinarily, a winner of the previous year’s Champion Bumper would be expected to have no trouble with the distance but Sir Gerhard has often looked a little different. Anyone who’s ridden him has immediately been struck by the raw speed he possesses. He did win a point to point but has never gone beyond two miles on the track. His jumping was far from perfect when making the running at the Dublin Racing Festival but ultimately he still won with authority. Willie Mullins’s shuffle of his novice resources sees Sir Gerhard extended in trip and his place in the line-up alone will be enough encouragement for many. Any chink in the stamina armour could be exploited by Journey With Me but Sir Gerhard is very much the one to beat. That comment also looks to apply to his stable companion Facile Vega in the Weatherbys Champion Bumper. Quevega’s son is one of seven Mullins hopes in a race the champion trainer has dominated like no other here with 11 wins already in the bag. Even the trainer appeared awestruck by how impressive Facile Vega was at last month’s Dublin Racing Festival and that reputation is reflected in his price. Nevertheless, there is ample evidence of how a Mullins outsider can emerge on top in this race which means a horse like James’s Gate is no back number. On the face of it though, the big danger to the favourite looks to be another unbeaten star in American Mike. That presents the prospect of a classic Mullins-Elliott clash and if the confidence behind American Mike is more understated than his rival it’s nonetheless substantial. Bravemansgame and Ahoy Senor bring their own big reputations to the Brown Advisory Novice Chase in which, for once, Mullins isn’t to the forefront of many calculations. That could prove expensive as the step up to three miles might work wonders for Capodanno. Brian O’Connor’s day two tips Cheltenham 1.30 - Sir Gerhard 2.10 - Capodanno 2.50 - Camprond 3.30 - Shishkin 4.10 - Tiger Roll 4.50 - Andy Dufresne 5.30 - American Mike (Nap). Nap and Double - American Mike & Camprond.