The Department of Defence has objected to fast-track plans by Tetrarch Capital for 274 residential units at Mill Rd, Saggart in west Dublin. The department is objecting to the development on the grounds of its impact on the nearby Casement Aerodrome. Tetrarch Residential Ltd lodged a Strategic Housing Development (SHD) scheme in January comprising 185 apartments, 51 houses and 38 duplex units for the site north-west of Saggart village and close to Casement Aerodrome in Baldonnel. According to Tetracrh Residentilal’s planning consultants, Manahan Planners, the SHD scheme is the first large scale, privately delivered residential development devoted entirely to social and affordable housing. The height of the apartment block in the proposed scheme rise to between five and eight storeys. In planning documents lodged with the scheme, Tetrarch said that, subject to permission being granted, it is its intention to then enter into negotiations with South Dublin County Council to seek agreement for a pricing structure for all units in the development to accommodate 45 affordable units, 70 social units and 159 affordable/cost rental units. The planning consultants for Tetrarch said that it was Tetrarch’s intention that the proposed development would “constitute the first large scale, privately delivered residential development devoted entirely to social and affordable tenure, including a very material quantum of affordable to sell units”. Zoned lands Manahan Planners said that the density of residential development makes efficient use of zoned lands in a suburban area of Saggart/Citywest, located in close proximity to frequent public transport. However, in a submission to An Bord Pleanála, the Deptartment of Defence stated that it was objecting to Block A of the scheme due to its impact on Casement Aerodrome. The department state that “Casement Aerodrome is the only secure airport in the State providing the Government and the President with an independent and flexible transport service. Routinely security sensitive arrivals and departures to the State occur at Casement Aerodrome. Ensuring the security of Casement is essential to this role.” In its submission, the Department of Defence said that “it is not satisfied that the Mill Road SHD will not negatively impact flight operations in the vicinity of Casement Aerodrome”. In a separate submission, Rathcoole Community Council said that they believed “that the granting of permission for this particular SHD development would be premature”. In a planning submission to the appeals board, South Dublin County Council has recommended a grant of permission. A decision is due on the scheme in May.