The Gaelic Players Association is threatening action if players are not reimbursed for expenses for all collective training sessions. A communiqué from GPA chief executive Tom Parsons outlined the position. Stating the intention to consult with membership to “consider the next steps” - his comments come after it emerged that negotiations for a new players charter have broken down. Failure to reach agreement on the charter meant that the GAA has proceeded with it unilaterally and informed counties of its provisions. “We will continue to consult with all GPA squad reps and captains this week to consider next steps in this regard,” said Parsons. “The GPA will be undertaking a detailed cultural audit of the inter-county playing environment and we demand that all players are paid the expenses incurred for all collective training sessions with immediate effect. “Until every player is paid their expenses for all collective sessions, there will be action by players in response.” The issues arose during discussions on a new players’ charter, which would amongst other things, restore players’ expenses to pre-pandemic levels. In recognition of the financial impact of Covid, a reduction in mileage rates from 65 cent to 50 cent had been agreed, according to Parsons. “The GPA agreed to this in good faith with the GAA on the basis that a return to normality would see a reinstatement of the 2019 charter provisions at a minimum. “The GPA is extremely disappointed that the GAA’s position at the start of 2022 was to continue with the cost saving mechanisms, ie players to receive a reduced mileage rate of 50c and to continue to cap players to be only permitted to claim expenses for three sessions per week, resulting in all other scheduled sessions being at the cost of the players.” Among the cuts agreed to the charter for 2020 and ‘21 was a reduction in collective training sessions to a maximum of three a week. This also appears to have become a sticking point, as the GAA have gone ahead under the new charter with a limit of four sessions/matches per week - activity beyond that to be negotiated locally with county boards. Under the old charter, all sessions/matches were reimbursed. Out of pocket It is also understood that the mileage rate has been restored to 65 cent and payment of expenses up to the limit of four sessions/matches per week is currently being processed. The threat of action however is aimed at securing the payment of expenses “for all collective training sessions with immediate effect”. The GPA have been pushing for ‘out of pocket’ expenses to be settled immediately. “During the negotiation process and regardless of an agreed charter, we have on numerous occasions asked the GAA to play the ‘out of pocket’ travel expenses for collective training sessions to players. “Three months later, and the vast majority of players have still not been paid expenses, the latest proposal by the GAA for the 2022 charter still sees a cap placed on the number of sessions a player can claim per week, and the GAA suggest to move negotiations above that cap to the players and their county boards locally. “The GPA believes this is unfair, and against the spirit of the charter which is to set out minimum and equal standards of provisions for all counties and all players.” This suggests that another fault-line is the central disbursement of expenses. The GAA undertook - primarily for reasons of cash flow - to pay these centrally under the previous charter and bill them back to the counties, less a national subvention, which under the new charter is worth 18 cent. Whereas that practice will continue under the new charter, anything beyond the limit of four sessions/matches per week will have to be negotiated locally and won’t be eligible for the subvention.