Taoiseach Micheál Martin has said he does not believe a mandatory return to mask-wearing indoors would change the trajectory of the latest Covid-19 wave. His comments came after the Irish Association for Emergency Medicine and the Irish Nurses and Midwives Organisation called on the Government to revisit restrictions such as masks and working from home, as the health service struggles to cope with a surge in infections. In an interview on RTÉ’s Today with Claire Byrne, Mr Martin said the view from public health was the BA.2 variant was so transmissible it was almost impossible to stop it. He said he had been in touch with the Health Service Executive (HSE) and the chief medical officer and was following public health advice. He said the BA.2 variant – which accounts for almost 95 per cent of Covid cases in Ireland – was more transmissible than previous variants but “does not appear to be damaging public health to the same extent”. He said it was not causing greater admissions to hospital or intensive care (ICU), but he acknowledged it was putting “enormous pressure” on the health system as Covid cases “demand isolation treatment”. However, the Taoiseach insisted the return of restrictions was not justified, saying: “I accept fully the problems [in the health service] but suggesting if we just brought in masks that could change all of that, it just doesn’t cover it.” The number of patients with the virus in hospital on Thursday morning was 1,535, down from 1,610 the previous day. The number of virus patients in ICU was 58, up nine from Wednesday. The Irish Nurses and Midwives Organisation said this month has been the worst March for overcrowding since it began counting trolleys in 2006, with 11,001 patients without a bed. There were 29,506 patients on trolleys throughout quarter one of 2022, it said. ‘Unsafe’ Earlier, the president of the Irish Association for Emergency Medicine Dr Fergal Hickey warned the healthcare service was not coping with the latest wave of Covid-19 and said steps must be taken to “flatten the curve”. Dr Hickey, who is also an emergency medicine consultant at Sligo General Hospital, told RTÉ’s Morning Ireland the situation in emergency departments was “unsafe and intolerable”. “We know, for example, that if you have to wait for more than five hours for a decision to admit in an emergency department, an additional one in 82 patients will die as a direct result,” he said. “We know that if you are in an emergency department that is overcrowded there is an increase in 30-day mortality from all causes for all patients. They are things which are potentially preventable by some action.” Dr Hickey said hospitals were not looking for a return to draconian restrictions, but “relatively simple interventions”, which he said could mean the difference for individual patients between “life and death”. “We don’t see politicians, we don’t see senior figures within the HSE visiting emergency departments at the moment because they would be afraid of what they might find,” he said. Latest wave On Wednesday the Health Protection Surveillance Centre was notified of a further 5,381 PCR-confirmed cases of Covid-19. In addition, 7,127 people registered a positive antigen result through the HSE’s online portal on Tuesday. There are signs the current wave may be peaking. The combined number of positive results from PCR and antigen tests each day, though an underestimate of the real number of infections, has started to decline. Hospitalisations are rising more slowly and ICU numbers are holding steady. Mr Martin confirmed on Wednesday that pandemic emergency powers to restrict travel and stop public gatherings , which were signed into law in March 2020, were due to expire at midnight on Thursday.