Situated on the north side of Naas town, Johnstown village is a great place for families. By now it is almost a suburb of Naas, Kildare’s county town, which has a thriving centre with lots of shopping, cafes, pubs and fine dining options. St John’s Park South is an estate of large family homes set around a green that is almost equidistant from exits 8 and 9 of the N7. Built in 2003 by developer Dwyer Nolan, the estate extends to about 80 homes, of which about 30 are large detached five-beds on big sites. Number 4 is one of these and sits on half an acre of grounds that include a detached garage and a garden room. It is situated to the back of the estate at the end of a quiet cul-de-sac but within ball-kicking distance of a large green. Generously proportioned, it extends to 316sq m (3,400sq ft). The front door opens into a fuchsia pink hall, a colour that also features in the the kitchen, and through to a dining room. This in turns leads through to a very smart and dual-aspect sitting room where there is a raised hearth and stone-clad feature wall. This room links through to a vaulted, timber-framed sunroom that overlooks the large garden. The sizeable eat-in kitchen is similarly proportioned and also has a lounge area.These rooms open out to a back garden that runs to 100 metres. Set out in lawn, it has been extensively landscaped and includes sandstone water features and a large patio in the same material. There’s also a gazebo-style garden room with decking surround that has been wired for electricity and could also work really well as a home office. Upstairs there are five double bedrooms, two of which are en suite. The property includes a large detached garage as well off-street parking for up to four or five cars. The C1-rated residence has concrete floors and oil-fired underfloor heating. The property is about 6km from the train link at Sallins, where the journey times to Dublin’s Heuston Station ranges from about 22 to 30 minutes. The house came for sale in 2020 asking €775,000 but is now back on the market seeking €850,000 through agents Coonan Property. Number one, also a five-bedroom detached property, sold for €680,000 in September 2020, according to the Property Price Register.