Passengers flying through Dublin Airport have been warned to expect lengthy delays in the weeks ahead as security systems come under pressure.  Many people reported long delays at the weekend, which continued throughout Sunday. Some said  they missed their flights after queuing to get through security for  more than two hours. A spokesman for Dublin Airport said they “empathise completely” with any passenger who has missed a flight this weekend “as a result of the delays at airport security”. “Thankfully, many of those passengers have been accommodated on later flights or have re-booked,” the spokesman said. “Dublin Airport’s customer service team is available to answer any questions that impacted passengers may have regarding their rights. They can be contacted on +353 1 9444717 or via email at customerexperience@dublinairport.com.” Passengers have been posting images and videos on social media across the weekend of long queues. Former television news anchor and press adviser Alan Cantwell said on Twitter that he had waited two and a half hours to get through security and missed his flight. One woman wrote online that she was “prevented from flying” despite arriving three hours before her flight. ‘Ramp up operations’ Dublin Airport has apologised to passengers impacted by long delays but said queues for security are likely to be experienced at peak hours over the days and weeks ahead. “Like other airports all over Europe, we are currently working extremely hard to ramp up our operation at Dublin Airport after the collapse of international travel over the past two years, including the hiring and training of staff,” the spokesman said. “The recruitment, training and background security checks for all staff working at an international airport takes a number of weeks. This is happening against a backdrop of growing passenger numbers at Dublin Airport. This is having an impact on the length of time it is taking passengers to get through security, particularly at busy times.” Anyone travelling through Dublin Airport in the coming days and weeks “should be prepared for things to take longer than they might expect”, the spokesman added. “To minimise the impact, we encourage all passengers to check in bags where they can and to carry the minimum amount with them when presenting at security. “We would also encourage all passengers to be at the airport a minimum of two hours before boarding a short-haul flight and three hours prior to boarding a long-haul flight.” The airport remained busy throughout Sunday and the weekend, with long queues continuing in the departures area of Terminal One until Sunday evening. Airport operator DAA said about 1,000 workers had availed of a voluntary severance scheme during the pandemic and it has been recruiting new staff since early this year, including security staff. New background checks for staff were introduced this year and that process takes a number of weeks and has contributed to delays getting through security, it said. It apologised to passengers who had missed flights due to delays and said many had been accommodated on later flights or had rebooked.