A Belfast speech by the Minister for Foreign Affairs Simon Coveney has been interrupted after a “suspect device” was found in the car park of the venue. It is understood a van was hijacked on Friday morning and a canister or device was put in the back and the driver was ordered to drive it to the Houban Centre on Belfast’s Crumlin Road where the event was taking place. The event organiser said a suspect device was discovered in the car park of the venue. “There is a security alert and the PSNI [Police Service of Northern Ireland] are currently assessing the situation. Everyone has had to evacuate the centre,” Tim Attwood, secretary of the Hume Foundation, told Reuters at the scene. Mr Coveney later said in a tweet: “Saddened and frustrated that someone has been attacked and victimised in this way and my thoughts are with him and his family.” A Department of Foreign Affairs spokesman said: “The Minister and team are safe, have been taken to a secure location and the PSNI are in control of the situation.” He added: “A security incident was declared by the PSNI as Minister Coveney gave a scheduled speech in the Houben Centre in Belfast following a meeting with the Pat and John Hume Foundation.” Mr Coveney had to leave the stage at the Houben Centre in north Belfast after a message was relayed to him while speaking. The Minister interrupted his speech saying, “I’m afraid I have to leave, I hope I’ll be back in a few minutes, you’ll just have to understand that.” The building was then evacuated. He had told the event: “The patient work of reconciliation and deepening of relationships does need to continue on our own island.” Mr Attwood told the PA news agency that the security alert is a reminder “to everyone that there is no role in our society for violence”. He added: “A suspect device will not stop the work of the John and Pat Hume Foundation.” In a statement, the PSNI said: “Police are currently in attendance of a security alert at the Crumlin Road area of north Belfast. Motorists are advised to avoid the area and seek alternative main routes for their journey. There are no further details at this stage.” More to follow. –Additional reporting Reuters/PA