In a sector that has experienced a very large volume of growth, Ireland’s leading companies came together to network and celebrate their collective achievements over the past year. Innovation and growth were key at this year’s Irish Private Label & Contract Manufacturer Awards where nine prestigious awards were handed out on October 27th. With over 15 companies entering the Awards, the winners were announced to a live virtual audience at a ceremony hosted by broadcaster and comedian Colm O’Regan. The Awards were supported by Amarach Research. One of the winners was the Great Northern Distillery. Their chairman, John Teeling was very proud of the win, saying; “The services provided by Great Northern means you don't need a distillery to be in the branded whiskey business. We supply private label whiskey to a range of customers in many countries. We are delighted with the award.” Another finalist was Ice Cream Treats. Director, Gerard Sheridan said; “Ice Cream Treats were delighted to be finalists in two categories in the Awards. It's very rewarding and a huge endorsement of the partnerships and work we do when industry professionals credits your efforts in the market place.” Darragh Feirritear, head of judging, said; “The addition of a full online broadcast of the live event has added a new dimension to the awards ceremony. Because of this, entrants to the awards can now receive comprehensive video collateral of their engagement on the night which is of huge value in their own social media communications activity.” He added; “We also now provide judges feedback reports which give finalists information on how their entries faired against their competitors. This data provides insights on where improvements are needed to win more consistently at the awards.” The full list of the 2021 winners is: Snacks Private Label / Contract Manufacturer of the Year Winner: Oriel Sea Salt Company Meal Preparation Private Label / Contract Manufacturer of the Year Winner: Valeo Foods Dairy Private Label / Contract Manufacturer of the Year Winner: Aurivo Consumer Foods Bakery & Desserts Private Label / Contract Manufacturer of the Year Winner: Walsh's Bakehouse Food & Beverage Private Label / Contract Manufacturer of the Year Winner: Great Northern Distillery Investment of the Year – Manufacturing Facility Winner: Lynoslife Private Label / Contract Manufacturer Collaboration Award Winner: Mackle Petfoods & Jollyes Private Label Retailer of the Year Winner: Aldi Ireland Overall Excellence Award Winner: Oriel Sea Salt Company The 2021 judging panel was comprised of: