Semiconductor company Analog Devices is to create 250 new jobs as it invests €100 million over the next three years in ADI Catalyst, a 9,290sq m (100,000sq ft) facility for innovation and collaboration located at its campus in the Raheen Business Park in Limerick. The jobs at Catalyst will primarily focus on the development of software-enabled solutions and artificial intelligence innovations in areas such as Industry 4.0, sustainable energy, automotive electrification and next-generation connectivity. One of the current Catalyst projects is focused on supporting healthcare’s migration from a mass-market approach to one of customised treatment and therapies. Analog Devices chief executive Vincent Roche said: “ADI Catalyst is our latest investment in the future of innovation, not just in Ireland or Europe, but globally. “It provides the ideal environment for experts in their fields to connect, collaborate, test and pilot new technologies, business models, and ecosystems. “Opening ADI Catalyst enables us to share ideas, capabilities and resources with teams in Europe and around the world, for the greater good.” ‘Terrific news’ In addition to ADI Catalyst, Ireland is home to ADI’s European Research and Development Centre, which develops technology and includes the assignment of more than 1,000 patents. ADI launched its European manufacturing and research and development hub in 1976 in Limerick, which remains its European headquarters today. ADI employs more than 2,200 professionals across 14 European sites. IDA Ireland chief executive Martin Shanahan said an investment of this scale by ADI was “terrific news for the midwest region”. “Since 1976, ADI has had a presence here in Ireland, where it employs more than 1,300 people,” he said. “This latest investment in ADI Catalyst is not only testament to the company’s continued focus on driving innovation, but also its long-standing commitment to Ireland and Europe more broadly. “In choosing to expand operations here in Limerick, ADI has located in a region with a buoyant business ecosystem, a strong track record of established global businesses and talented and highly skilled workforce.”