Shoppers face further food price hikes as farm fertiliser costs have more than doubled this year, forcing producers to pass on the extra expense. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and soaring natural gas charges have combined to drive up fertiliser prices at a time when farmers’ demand for it is highest. Barry O’Halloran has the details. Bank of Ireland is to create 100 new technology-focused jobs. This is in addition to the 130 IT specialist roles it announced last April The recruitment drive comes as the bank continues with its multimillion euro digital transformation programme. Charlie Taylor reports. Credit union representatives will urge Minister of State Seán Fleming in a meeting on Thursday to back the setting up of a policy taskforce to develop a sector that has been dogged for years by excess customers and regulatory restrictions on certain types of lending, writes Joe Brennan. As Ireland knows, it would be foolhardy to underestimate the serious effect of any cyberattack or the long-term impact. Taking out a healthcare service’s data network can threaten lives too. Karlin Lillington, in her weekly column, looks at the threat posed by cyberwarfare. Cantillon wonders where the price of oil and gas will end up and wonders if Irish companies will succumb to public pressure and pull out of Russia, Ciara O’Brien looks at how you can deal with fake news and disinformation online and reviews the Elecjet Apollo Ultra power bank. Fáilte Ireland has launched an online portal and national database for school transition year (TY) student work placement opportunities in the tourism industry, as part of a strategy to tempt future workers into the sector to alleviate the ongoing chronic staffing crisis that is expected to persist for several years. Mark Paul reports. Our New Innovator slot meets UCD physics professor Dominic Zerulla, founder of PEARLabs, who has created a different type of light source for microscopes Nearly two weeks into the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Cliff Taylor and Mark Paul of The Irish Times take a look at the impact of the war on the global economy. They speak to Ciaran Hancock on our Inside Business podcast about rising energy costs and the implications for Irish consumers and businesses. A company linked to property developer Paddy McKillen and his family has bought Kerry confectionery maker and cafe business, Skelligs Chocolate from Dublin businessman Colm Healy for a price believed to be close to €2 million. Disney is plotting a sports betting push in an effort to revitalise ESPN but will this hurt its family friendly imge? Christopher Grimes reports. Stay up to date with all our business news: sign up to our business news alerts and our Business Today daily email news digest.