15 Hugo Keenan The standout moment was a brilliant try saving tackle on Scotland captain and fullback Stuart Hogg at a time when the visitors might still have harboured aspirations to win. Another high quality contribution on both sides of the ball. Rating: 8 14 Mack Hansen His influence grew as the game went on especially in attack where he beat the first defender several times but he should also take satisfaction from one great read in defence in the Irish 22 when Scotland might have scored a try. Rating: 7 13 Garry Ringrose He works so hard to shore up the mistakes or misreads of his teammates and that selflessness was once again apparent. He didn’t get much chance to attack as that aspect of Ireland’s display was a little off colour but worked to plug holes in defence. Rating: 7 12 Bundee Aki He certainly wasn’t helped by a lack of shape in Ireland’s backline, and was often given poor ball to try and work the oracle. A knock-on from a Johnny Sexton pass highlighted the lack of empathy between the two on the day and he was also caught offside. Rating: 6 11 James Lowe He did some very good things, one great kick, and made some mistakes that were untypical - three turnovers, and he got in the way of a pre-planned move. But his power and determination in the build-up to Conor Murray’s bonus point was typical of his fire and attitude. Rating: 6 10 Johnny Sexton (capt) He will be disappointed with the disjointed nature of Ireland’s back play and spurned one try scoring chance when he should have passed. Great 50-22 kick, typically brave in defence and it wasn’t all doom and gloom in attack. Rating: 7 9 Jamison Gibson-Park This was another high quality contribution, sharp and lively in giving his team tempo and line breaks in equal measure. Sure he’d like to take back one or two decisions but it’s a minor cavil when weighed against his all round display including a try saving tackle. Rating: 8 1 Cian Healy An integral part of a scrum that didn’t budge and was typically intelligent in finding a millimetre of space to power over for his try; one or two very good carries with footwork. Rating: 7 2 Dan Sheehan An outstanding performance in all aspects of the game from his lineout throwing - one picked off - to his carrying, beating defenders through footwork or power with equal facility. He capped a superb game with a try. Rating: 9 3 Tadhg Furlong Showed an enthusiasm and energy for all forms of contact and was rock solid in the scrum initially and then part of Ireland’s late dominance. A great penalty turnover at a ruck, good reads in defence and overall a high energy input. Rating: 7 4 Tadhg Beirne His application and work-rate was typically diligent and perhaps his greatest contribution was his tackle count in defence and ability to slow down the ball at the breakdown. A handling error or two but it was very much in keeping with the context of the game. Rating: 7 5 Iain Henderson Ireland’s lineout caller took responsibility in securing most of the ball (10 throws) and was very assured in that capacity. He worked hard around the pitch but will be disappointed to have been stripped close to the Scottish line. Rating: 6 6 Caelan Doris Led the way with two turnovers, one of which led to a relieving penalty and the other put a stop to a Scottish counterattack. He won’t be happy with a knock on when coming onto a pass four metres from the Scottish line but overall an industrious effort. Rating: 7 7 Josh van der Flier If there was a player who demonstrated the grit and application required to ensure a positive result then it was Ireland’s openside flanker. He is credited with 17 tackles but it looked more; he was present when Ireland needed him most and capped the display with a try. Rating: 8 8 Jack Conan One thundering carry early on in which he bounced George Turner in a tackle, another muscular effort in the build-up to Cian Healy’s try but the game didn’t really run his way and he was replaced on 53 minutes despite a bright start to the second half. Rating: 6 Replacements Dave Kilcoyne had a big impact off the bench in helping Ireland assert some scrum dominance, Conor Murray grabbed a try and read the game beautifully while Robbie Henshaw provided intelligent direction and hustled for a couple of turnovers. The bench gave Ireland fresh impetus. Rating: 7 Coach Andy Farrell has overseen the evolution in Ireland’s playing style that’s moved forward appreciably during the tournament. Four wins from five matches underlines the progress that Ireland are making under his guidance and he deserves huge credit. There is still a way to go but based on the campaign the signs are positive. Rating: 8