Do you feel like your bathroom is getting smaller while your skincare collection’s getting larger? Well if so, this one’s for you! Last time we met, you learned how to set up your power drill. Today, we are putting this knowledge to work. What better way to kick our bathroom storage up a notch and make skincare routines a breeze, than to hang a shelf dedicated to morning and evening rituals. Easy to see, easy to organise, easy to reach. So, what style of shelf? I find floating shelves (in materials suited to bathrooms of course) ideal. They take up minimal space and the fixings are more protected from moisture than exposed brackets. I would also suggest one with a lip to avoid anything sliding off. Before you buy, you need to be aware of the weight of your products, as well as the length and depth needed. Shelves come with a weight restriction so be sure to check it’s a match. Your new shelf will likely not be supplied with wall anchors to hold screws securely. This is because different wall types will require different anchors. Once you know which type you need, take the weight of the shelf plus the products and select an anchor that can support double this. Better safe than sorry. Masking tape The easiest way to make sure you drill into the perfect spot on the first go, is to grab some masking tape. Run a taut length of tape across the shelf’s bracket, marking the screw holes with a pencil. This will be your easy guide to map how far apart your anchors need to be and also acts as a mock up. Tape it to your chosen spot and step back and see how it looks. Does it block doors, drawers or fittings from operating as they should or will it be a hindrance as someone moves around the room? If it’s good to go, use a spirit level and tweak where needed. Last, for safety, run a cable/pipe detector over the spots you need to drill into and make sure it is ok to do so. This part is vital in a bathroom as pipes are plentiful. There is no need to remove the tape just yet, you can drill your pilot holes through it at the marked spots, then gently peel off and apply your anchors. Once you have the anchors and the bracket in place you can slide on your shelves. When it comes to arranging your product, it’s totally up to you but in order of use will mean you never forget a step. Stunning!