Derry 0-12 Galway 4-11 Galway produced a barnstorming performance to defeat Derry by 11 points at Owenbeg, the big win confirming both promotion for Pádraig Joyce’s side and their place in the Division Two final in two weeks’ time. Three first-half goals did the damage, with a fourth from Tomo Culhane nailing victory for Galway and leaving beaten Derry’s fate no longer in their own hands. Derry’s much cherished clean sheet record was ruthlessly dismantled in an opening 35 minutes that saw their opponents rifle home three goals. If the goals provided the key scores, the league leaders ran in an untouchable 13 points up, at 3-8 to 0-4, at half-time. And while the visitors were clinical, the home side chose the wrong time to produce their worst half of a promising season. Lacking belief, leadership and guilty of uncommon basic errors, Rory Gallagher’s side, facing a stiff, unrelenting breeze, struggled to play any meaningful football. Late replacement Lachlan Murray jinked inside and out a couple of defenders to tap over Derry’s first score and level the game at 0-2 apiece in the sixth minute. But after that Derry rarely played their part in a one-sided contest. With star forward Shane McGuigan absent, Emmett Bradley and Niall Loughlin converted a free each, before a late Paul Cassidy point concluded Derry’s poor scoring return. In between times Galway flourished. Matthew Tierney producing a scintillating man-of-the-match performance and began the rout when he palmed home a Paul Conroy pass in the 10th minute. Damien Comer, unmarked at the back post, blasted into the top right hand corner in the 23rd minute before Dessie Conneely hit their third goal just before half-time. With that strongly breeze now at the backs, Derry scored first after the break. But any hopes of staging an unlikely revival were firmly slammed shut with Culhane’s 41st-minute goal. It stretched Galway’s advantage to an unassailable 15-point lead and dealt a devastating blow to the Oakleaf County’s hopes of promotion in a year that promised so much. Gallagher’s men battled on and managed to wipe a little blood off the scoreboard through points from Loughlin, Ciarán McFaul and Niall Toner. Paul Conroy, the outstanding midfielder on the pitch with three points from play, was shown a red card in the 57th minute but it made little impact on proceedings. Derry’s Gareth McKinless saw red soon after with both sides finishing with 14 men in a game that was far from feisty from start to conclusion. “In fairness to our lads they put in a brilliant performance in the first half,” said Galway manager Joyce after the win. “They took their chances when they came and to go in 13 points up at half-time, the game was probably done. We got a great tonic after half-time with another goal. Overall I’d be happy enough.” Joyce agreed on the importance of a return to Division One. “It’s very important,” he said. “We put ourselves down to Division Two last year and it’s great to be back to Division One.” DERRY: O Lynch; C McKaigue, B Rogers, P McGrogan; G McKinless, C Doherty, C Glass; E Bradley (0-3, three frees), E Doherty; O McWilliams, C McFaul (0-3), B Heron; N Loughlin (0-3, three frees), P Cassidy (0-1), L Murray (0-1). Subs: P Cassidy for B Heron, N Toner (0-1) for C Doherty (both 46 mins), C McCluskey for L Murray (58), S Downey for O McWilliams (65), B McCarron for E Doherty (70). GALWAY: C Flaherty; J Glynn, K Molloy, L Silke; D McHugh, J Daly, C McDaid (0-1); P Kelly, P Conroy (0-3); M Tierney (1-3), S Kelly, J Heaney; R Finnerty, D Comer (1-1), D Conneely (1-3). Subs: O Gallagher for R Finnerty (h-t), T Culhane (1-0) for D Comer (38 mins), J McGrath for J Glynn (47), N Daly for P Kelly (55), S Fitzgerald for S Kelly (70). Referee: S Hurson (Tyrone).