The 2021 National Procurement Awards celebrated a sector that was crucial in facilitating the regular running of supply chains during the pandemic. Having faced many challenges, leading companies from across the country gathered to celebrate their successes across the 16 prestigious awards handed out on November 18th. With over 25 companies represented at the Awards, the winners were announced during a hybrid event with a live audience in attendance at the Clontarf Castle and others attending an interactive virtual ceremony, which was hosted by broadcaster and comedian Colm O’Regan. Now in their 11th year, the Awards were supported by leading suppliers and organisations from the sector. Lyndsay Pollard, program & project manager of sponsor, Verizon said: “We were delighted to be a sponsor to the Procurement Awards for 2021. As we work closely within this sector, we understand how exceptionally challenging it has been this year for everyone in so many ways. It was great to see how the finalists came together to tell their positive stories, showing fantastic innovation and perseverance, while raising industry standards. Congratulations to all involved, including the event organisers and a special well done to the winners.” Another of this year’s sponsors was BT Sourced with their chief procurement officer, Cyril Pourrat saying; “We were delighted to be a sponsor to the Procurement Awards for 2021. Because we work closely within this sector we understand how exceptionally challenging it has been this year for everyone in so many ways. It was great to see how the finalists came together to tell their positive stories and how the event adapted to the times and delivered a safe and engaging event. Congratulations to all involved and a special well done to the winners.” Events like this are only made possible thanks to the generosity and support of sponsors and supporters. The National Procurement Awards are particularly thankful to their 2021 sponsors and supporters, which included Verizon, BT Sourced, Amarach Research and the Procurement Transformation Institute. One of this year’s winners was Compass Ireland. Head of sourcing, Edward Fagan said that; “Seeking out new, sustainable agriculture practices and additional Irish suppliers, and re-looking at disposables and packaging is reducing our carbon footprint, while supporting a sustainable local economy." Primark joined this year’s winners with their director of procurement, Ross Grierson saying; “For the Primark procurement function to be recognised at these awards is testament to the great work the whole team performs every day.  I am especially proud of how we effectively balanced the needs of customers, colleagues and suppliers whilst navigating our way through the pandemic" The full online broadcast of the live event which is now available has added a new dimension to the awards ceremony. Thanks to the broadcast, entrants can now receive comprehensive video collateral of their participation on the night which is of huge value for their own social media communications activity. New judges’ feedback reports also give finalists information on how their entries faired against their competitors. This data provides insights on where improvements are needed to win more consistently at the awards. The full list of the 2021 winners is: Most Innovative Use of Technology (Sponsored by BT Sourced) Winner: Glanbia Ireland Best People Development Initiative Winner: Iarnród Éireann Best Supplier Relationship Management Award Winner: Translink Fleet Procurement Best Green Procurement Project of the Year (Sponsored by Verizon) Winner: Compass Ireland Best Healthcare Procurement Project of the Year Winner: PharmaSource – Uniphar Best International Procurement Project of the Year Winner: Verizon Ericsson 5 Year Agreement 2021-2025 – Verizon Best Procurement Internal Collaboration Project of the Year Winner: Perrigo Best Procurement External Collaboration Project of the Year Winner: Office of Government Procurement & the Department of Social Protection Best Education Procurement Project of the Year Winner: Supply of PPE to the Education Sector – EPS Best TECH or Telecoms Procurement Project of the Year Winner: Verizon Best Manufacturing Procurement Project of the Year Winner: Palladium Problem Solving Expedition – Pfizer Best Public Sector, Semi-State or Government Procurement Project of the Year Winner: ESB COVID-19 Crisis Response Award (Sponsored by Verizon) Winner: Primark Best Procurement Team of the Year Winner: EPS Procurement Leader 2021 Recipient: Ken Foley Overall Excellence in Procurement (Sponsored by BT Sourced) Winner: Verizon The 2021 judging panel was comprised of: