Are you a saver or a spender? I’ve always been in the habit of saving, especially when it comes to travel. Material possessions don’t appeal to me in the way that experiences do. I’m not a person who’s into designer brands or flash cars, I’m all about the trips and the memories. Do you shop around for better value? Sometimes I like for things to be convenient, so if I’m time poor and there’s an easy option, I’ll go for that. I also like to support Irish businesses wherever I can. What has been your most extravagant purchase and how much did it cost? My app, Yoga With Maura. It’s been a massive investment and risk, both personally and professionally, and there have been a lot of hidden costs involved. I had no idea that the cost would be so high, but I see it as a long-term investment in my business and myself that will pay off over time. What purchase have you made that you consider the best value for money? My phone is a huge part of my business and has enabled me to get the exposure I could never have afforded without social media. At the start of the pandemic, I started doing free yoga classes via Instagram Live to help people deal with the stress and uncertainty we were all facing. Things have just snowballed from there. How did you prefer to shop during the Covid-19 restrictions – online or local? Since the pandemic, I have focused on shopping local, whether that be in stores or online. My yoga studio is in Dún Laoghaire and I love to support businesses in the neighbourhood. Do you haggle over prices? It depends on what it is. In business, there’s usually space to negotiate and I always aim to get the best rate possible. When it comes to shopping, as a consumer I usually just take the price at face value. How has the Covid-19 crisis changed your spending habits? I’ve definitely stopped buying fast fashion. Before the pandemic, I sometimes picked up cheap things randomly, whereas now I’m far more conscious of what I’m buying and the effect it has on the environment. When I’m buying, I look for pieces that I will wear at least 100 times as well as more Irish, sustainable and investment pieces. Do you invest in shares? I’ve invested in shares once using my Revolut app. I bought €20 worth and, to be completely honest, I have no idea how they’re doing. Maybe I should check. Cash or card? I’m definitely a card girl, but I always keep a fiver or a tenner in my purse just in case. What was the last thing you bought and was it good value for money? We just moved into a new place in Monkstown and I bought a couch secondhand on Facebook Marketplace. It’s the first time I’ve shopped on Facebook and I’m delighted with the value I got. Have you ever successfully saved up for a relatively big purchase? Every spare penny I’ve had over the last few years has gone towards building the business app. It was such a sense of achievement when it finally launched, given how much effort I had put into saving for it. At the moment, I’m saving for my wedding, which has had to be postponed twice but will hopefully go ahead this September. Have you ever lost money? Luckily, never. Are you a gambler and, if so, have you ever had a big win? Definitely not. I recently bought a lottery ticket when the prize value was at an all-time high, but I didn’t win. Is money important to you? Money is really not important as health and happiness will always be number one. However, in today’s world, it’s important to be financially stable, comfortable and not to have to worry about money, so I have a strong work ethic and will do whatever I can to keep money coming in. How much money do you have on you now? I have €5 cash in my purse. In conversation with Tony Clayton-Lea