For all of Ireland’s Six Nations silverware since the turn of the millennium, it is rare that the home faithful have witnessed an Irish side lifting a trophy on home soil. Grand Slams in 2009 and 2018 were secured in Cardiff and London respectively, while the championship trophies won in 2014 and 2015 were lifted in front of away fans in Paris and Edinburgh. Technically, a Six Nations title is still on the line this Saturday as Ireland take on Scotland at the Aviva, but a seemingly unlikely favour would be needed from England in Paris. Even if England fail, a Triple Crown is still up for grabs for Ireland. Victory over the Scots would see Johnny Sexton join a rare list of Irish captains that have lifted a trophy at home. The hits 2004: Ireland 37 Scotland 16, Triple Crown Winners For the last time Ireland won silverware at home, you have to go all the way back to 2004. Playing at the old Lansdowne Road, tries from Gordon D’Arcy (2), Geordan Murphy, David Wallace and Peter Stringer plus six successful Ronan O’Gara kicks saw Ireland coast to victory over Scotland and secure the Triple Crown. In a scenario that could well repeat itself on Saturday, France beat England in Paris later that day to secure the Grand Slam and deny Ireland the title. 1985: Ireland 13 England 10, Five Nations & Triple Crown Winners The Triple Crown in 2004 ended a 19-year wait for silverware for Ireland dating back to when they beat England in 1985 to pick up both the Five Nations title and the Triple Crown. Brendan Mullin scored Ireland’s only try that day at Lansdowne Road as Michael Kiernan’s boot ensured a narrow winning margin. Ireland went unbeaten in that campaign; all that denied them a Grand Slam was a frustrating 15-15 draw at home to France in round two. 1948: Ireland 6 Wales 3, Grand Slam Winners Ravenhill, rather than Lansdowne Road, was the scene of this triumph as Ireland secured their first Grand Slam. The term Grand Slam was supposedly not in the lexicon at the time – the Triple Crown was certainly the be-all and end-all – but nonetheless Jack Kyle and the rest of that famous Irish squad saw off Wales 6-3 thanks to tries from Barney Mullan and JC Daly – the latter pouncing on a mistake from the Welsh fullback. The misses For all the talk of winning trophies at home, there have also been occasions where Ireland fell at the last hurdle in front of their own fans. 2010: Ireland 20 Scotland 23, Ireland miss out on Triple Crown This is the game that has been brought up plenty of times this week as a word of warning against complacency. Ireland were favoured to sign off their tenure at Croke Park with a Triple Crown-securing win, but that figured without Dan Parks. The Scotland outhalf had the game of his career, kicking five penalties and a drop-goal to snatch an upset win. His last effort was the winning kick in the 78th minute. 2003: Ireland 6 England 42, England win the Grand Slam The infamous “red carpet gate”. It was an incredible matchup, a Grand Slam decider in Dublin. Martin Johnson lined up his England side on the wrong side of the red carpet, forcing Ireland to do the same in order to keep their customary position to the left of the tunnel when President Mary McAleese was introduced to the two sides. An irate Johnson refused to move when asked to do so and both unions later apologised for forcing the President to walk on the grass. Winding up Johnson and England clearly wasn’t a good idea as Ireland conceded five tries on their way to a shellacking that handed the visitors the Grand Slam. 1967: Ireland 6 France 11, France win the Five Nations Heading into the final round, Ireland, France and England were all level on four points atop the table. England ended up losing to Wales meaning the winner of Ireland’s clash with France in Dublin would secure the title. Jean-Michel Cabanier’s try was the difference between the sides as the visitors took both a five-point win and the championship back to Paris.