High-profile photographer and digital artist, Kevin Abosch, is among the names who appear on the latest list of tax defaulters published by the Revenue. Mr Abosch, who is based in New York, was the photographer behind the Faces of Ireland exhibition in Dublin Airport over a decade ago. He has also taken the portraits of celebrities including actors Johnny Depp and Scarlett Johansson. Mr Abosch is also prominent among artists who have reportedly made millions of dollars recently selling non fungible tokens (NFTs), cryptocurrency-linked digital assets linked to creative works. He appears on the defaulters list over a €183,000 tax debt linked to the under-declaration of income tax, following a Revenue audit. The latest Revenue list includes cases totalling over €2.8 million owed to the tax authority. The largest case on the list relates to Swords, Dublin-based jewellery designer, Chris Osborne, who is listed for more than €502,000 in income tax, penalties and interest, following a Revenue enquiry. More than €72,000 was listed as still unpaid at the end of 2021. Taxes Meath-based industrial and maritime paint company, Industrial and Protective Coatings, is listed as having owed more than €426,000 in corporation and employment taxes. Its latest accounts, for the 12 months to the end of May last year, show the company had reserves of €3.3 million. Its tax bill has been settled. The defaulters list, covering the final three months of 2021, also show Revenue has continued its clampdown on the medical profession, members of which have featured prominently in its lists for the last year. The latest list includes three companies whose directors are doctors. Garac Consulting in Cork, which is linked to Munster-based psychiatrist Attiya Suhail, is listed for more than €93,000 in employment taxes. Dublin company Isamsawi Unlimited, whose directors include Cavan-based doctors Isameldia Hassan Ali and Amna Ibrahim, is listed for almost €45,000. Micdavids-Obioha Medical Services, whose directors include Dublin-based consultant psychiatrist, Prosper Obioha, is also listed for more than €70,000. The Irish Parachute Club, which operates from an airfield in Clonbullogue in Offaly, is also listed for more than €113,000. Fresh company filings this week in the Companies Registration Office show that it recently appointed several new directors.