Cowan-Dickie flap, Scotland vs England, round one The defining moment of a round-one loss that had England on the back foot for the rest of the championship. Luke Cowan-Dicke apologised after the match for deliberately batting the ball into touch and denying Darcy Graham a chance to gather and score, but nonetheless his yellow card and the penalty try he conceded handed Scotland a lifeline in a match they were losing at the time. Six minutes later, 14-man England conceded the match-winning penalty. Lineout malfunctions, France vs Ireland, round two A critical momentum killer. Tadhg Beirne of all people had just executed a ridiculous left-footed 50:22 in the 67th minute. Trailing by six points, Ireland had a much-needed lineout 10m from the French line. The opportunity didn’t last long. Francois Cros beat Iain Henderson to the throw and France cleared. It was perhaps a far-reaching moment, given Ireland’s decision to go for the points instead of opting for another lineout in the corner in the 73rd minute. Ewels red, England vs Ireland, round four The fact that the Twickenham crowd booed the decision to send off Charlie Ewels against Ireland is one thing. The fact that the RFU has since reportedly backed the idea of reducing red card punishments to a replacement after 20 minutes is altogether more worrying. If a major national union can be swayed to support a rule that removes the incentive to tackle lower by its own team losing a game when down to 14, then the sport is in a bad place. Historic Capuozzo, Wales vs Italy, round five A series of moments that combined to create the most memorable passage of the tournament. Ange Capuozzo’s step that made Kieran Hardy look rather foolish has earned deserving headlines, but it was subtle blocking lines from Michele Lamaro and Filippo Alongi on Taulupe Faletau and Adam Beard respectively – not to mention Josh Adams’s missed tackle – that opened up the space for the break in the first place. A match-winning display of the dark arts. Ruthless Alldritt, France vs England, round five We have seen Gregory Allldritt do this so many times, but none the more important than on Saturday night. Ellis Genge was slow to set as the pillar defender at a ruck in the 61st minute, and Alldritt pounced. He is hard enough to stop without giving him space, but a sharp carry through a disorganised line made it too easy to free his arms and offload to the onrushing Antoine Dupont for France’s third try. Their lead was only five points at the time and England had secured the last score. Alldritt’s was a Grand Slam-securing contribution.