The death has occurred of Stuart Walker, one of Dublin’s leading estate agents. A senior sales agent with the Vincent Finnegan firm, Mr Walker (67) drove some of the largest residential and commercial property deals in Dublin and the greater Dublin area over the course of a career that spanned several decades. Widely known and highly regarded within the property industry, his professional beat covered the capital’s most sought-after suburbs and took in both multimillion-euro sales and purchases of premium homes and commercial land transactions. Having graduated from Sandford Park School in Ranelagh in 1971, and from DIT Bolton Street in 1978, Mr Walker began his career at OKM. After establishing the Holmes Estate Agency in the 1980s, he went on to be appointed as a director at Ganly Walters in 1995. The final leg of his career brought him to the agency of Vincent Finnegan in 2013. Outside of his professional life, Mr Walker was a gifted and accomplished sportsman, earning Leinster and Irish hockey honours at club level and 33 international caps. He was a longstanding member of YMCA Hockey Club. Vinnie Finnegan, managing director of Vincent Finnegan, paid tribute to Mr Walker, saying: “Stuart epitomised what a senior property negotiator should be. He brought a style and panache, combined with a wealth of experience, to work with him each day. He was generous, patient and was an incredible negotiator acting on behalf of his clients. “It was perhaps his sporting career, representing Ireland in hockey that gave him a competitive edge to a property career spanning decades. I know we will continue to hear his voice lending advice and counsel to almost every situation. He was one of the finest gentlemen and agents I have ever had the privilege of working with. All his friends here at Vincent Finnegan will miss him dearly.” Mr Walker died peacefully on Friday, March 18th, in the care of his family and the staff at Our Lady’s Hospice in Harold’s Cross. He is survived by his wife, Penny, their four children, Sarah, Andrew, Darryl and Amanda, his daughter-in-law Jackie, grandchildren Emilie, Alexander and Archie, and his brothers Glyn, Norman and Howard. His funeral service will take place on Wednesday, March 23rd, at noon in Christ Church, Taney, Dublin 14, with a committal service to follow at 1.45pm in the Victorian Chapel at Mount Jerome Crematorium, Harold’s Cross, Dublin 6W.