A Dublin planning authority has recommended that ‘fast-track’ plans by co-owners of the Press Up Hospitality group for a €200 million apartment scheme near Blackrock be rejected. The 493-unit scheme from Paddy McKillen jnr and Matthew Ryan is one of two contentious Strategic Housing Development (SHD) schemes for the south Dublin area that Dun Laoghaire Rathdown County Council is advising An Bord Pleanála should be refused. In a separate chief executive report lodged with An Bord Pleanála, the council is recommending refusal for a ‘fast-track’ scheme by Keith Craddock’s Red Rock Glenageary Ltd for a 147-unit build-to-rent apartment scheme for Glenageary. The McKillen scheme is comprised of 11 apartment blocks scheme, with one block rising to 10 storeys, on lands at St Teresa’s, Temple Hill, Monkstown, Blackrock. As part of its 105-page report into the McKillen scheme, Dun Laoghaire Rathdown County Council states that the site is ideally suited to a higher-density scheme. Mr McKillen’s Oval Target previously secured planning permission for 291 residential units in June 2019 on the same site and that permission remains in place. However, the council said it has significant concerns relating to the new scheme’s height, scale and form and has recommended refusal of planning permission. Sylvan character The council highlighted the site’s sylvan and rich architectural character.It found the scheme would have an imposing and oppressive impact on the character, setting and visual amenity of St Teresa’s – a protected structure. It also pointed to a significant negative impact on the residential amenities of property within the vicinity. In total, 41 objections have been lodged with An Bord Pleanála against the new scheme, including a number of group objections In the case of the Red Rock, scheme, a separate chief executive’s report from Dun Laoghaire Rathdown County Council recommends refusal of permission because it constitutes overdevelopment due to its scale, height, massing and layout. More than 80 objections have been lodged against the scheme for a site at the junction of Sallynoggin Road Lower and Glenageary Avenue.