Ukraine’s World Cup playoff against Scotland could be deferred as football’s authorities try to ensure the country has a chance to qualify for Qatar 2022. In a further change prompted by the invasion of Ukraine, Poland are expected to be confirmed as having a bye into a playoff final after Russia’s ban from international football was enforced on Monday. Scotland are due to host Ukraine in Glasgow on March 24th in their playoff semi-final but there is uncertainty over whether Ukraine will be able to field a side, with the majority of their squad in their home country where they play their club football. The Ukrainian league has been suspended until further notice. The Scottish Football Association wrote to its Ukrainian counterpart this week offering support and is willing to accommodate any arrangement that would allow the match to take place. A formal proposal to delay the fixture has not been made and it is understood by all sides that any postponement would not guarantee the match takes place. A decision on whether the fixture can go ahead on the scheduled date must be made by the end of this week. A statement from the SFA said: “The Scottish FA president, Rod Petrie, has written to his counterpart at the Ukrainian Association of Football to send a message of support, friendship and unity. Football is inconsequential amid conflict, but we have conveyed the strong sense of solidarity communicated to us by Scotland fans and citizens in recent days. “We remain in dialogue with Uefa and Fifa regarding our men’s Fifa World Cup playoff and women’s World Cup qualifier and have offered to support our Ukrainian colleagues’ preparations as best we can in these unimaginably difficult circumstances.” Confirmation that Poland will progress, to play Sweden or the Czech Republic on 29 March, is expected. The Guardian understands that no alternative mechanism, such as drafting in Hungary or Finland, who narrowly missed out on qualification, is being considered. Poland took a public stand against Fifa when they called for Russia, their playoff opponents, to be banned. They were yet to receive direct communication from the governing body on Tuesday. – Guardian