When the owners bought number 21 Oakdale Drive, on a quiet cul-de-sac off the Johnstown Road, it resembled many of the other semi-detached, mid-century homes built when this part of Dublin 18 was considered an outer suburb. In 2012 they embarked on a significant refurbishment that pushed out its footprint to both the front and back and extended into the attic. They used architect Mark Davies of Arc Design, who cleverly added a porch to the front, accessed by granite steps. He used the same stone in the window sills, hived off a section of the garage to fit in a smart guest toilet and internal room, reserving about two-thirds of the garage as a place for motorbikes, bicycles and spare suitcases. He also pushed the house out the back to create an extremely generous open-plan living room/kitchen/dining room that is full of light from two long roof lights. This almost square room, which is about 72sq m , has perfectly proportioned zoned areas. The interior design throughout is by Garry Cohn. There’s one for watching TV, fitted with a custom L-shaped sofa in sea green, by Bespoke in Dún Laoghaire. Adjoining it is a dining area with seating by Hedgeroe and a dresser supplied by Strawbridge. This gives way to a large window seat. Across from it is a very smart kitchen by Newcastle Design that has polished stone worktops and an island that is 3.5 metres long and is topped with a thick grey Silestone slab. It gives a quasi-concrete effect but is far more hard wearing and durable. The room opens out to a north-east facing garden that is almost 120sq m in size. Private and laid out in low-maintenance paving and artificial lawn, it steps up to a timber deck where you get south-western sun. There is underfloor heating throughout the ground floor and the house has been significantly insulated and features NorDan aluclad glazing; double to the front and triple to the back. To the front is a formal sitting room of about 16sq m with a contemporary double-fronted, wood-burning stove; it features bespoke timber panelling that is also on show in the hall and in the architraving throughout. This was crafted by Kelly Interiors to Cohn’s spec. Upstairs there are three double bedrooms, one of which is en suite, as well as a fine family bathroom that has a large shower stall and separate, freestanding egg bath. The house now extends to 223sq m (2,400sq ft), of which about 36sq m comprises the attic room, currently used as the principal bedroom. It has a luxurious en suite shower room and lots of hanging space in the walk-in wardrobe. The property, which has a B1 Ber and off-street parking for at least two cars, is asking €850,000 through Sherry FitzGerald.