Ireland is to back an international agreement to exclude Russian and Belarusian teams and athletes from competition in a bid to further isolate them internationally and end the invasion of Ukraine. The agreement is set to be jointly announced by Ireland, the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Japan and European Union countries, Minister of State with responsibility for sport Jack Chambers told The Irish Times. It would back stripping Russia and Belarus of the right to host tournaments, the banning of their teams and athletes from international competition, and would challenge the investment of Russian cash in sport. “We still have sporting organisations that haven’t gone the full way in excluding Russia from major events or indeed participation. I think we need to see them all act in unison in solidarity with the Ukrainian people, and also to isolate Russia,” Chambers said. “Gymnastics haven’t moved the full way. Boxing hasn’t.” The Irish Government is to inform sporting bodies of its position on the issue, and expects them to comply. The International Gymnastics Federation and International Boxing Association did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Key role The inclusion of Belarus is due to its key role in supporting the attack on Ukraine, as the regime of dictator Alexander Lukashenko allowed the country to be used by the Russian army to launch its invasion. Chambers said that he felt the declaration would show solidarity with Ukraine and exert pressure on remaining sport organisations who have not yet taken the steps. “Having that joint collective political statement from a number of European countries and also countries from across the globe, I think applies that political pressure on sporting organisations to act,” he said. “I think sport can play a huge role in sending that powerful message to Russia and people within Russia. “Russian athletes should not be performing or participating or competing in international events while they invade and attack the Ukrainian people. I think sport is a powerful tool to isolate Russia, and indeed Belarus.” Oligarchs Following contacts with Sport Ireland, the Government is “not aware” of investments by Russian oligarchs being a major issue in Ireland, but Chambers said countries with bigger sporting industries would need to reckon with the problem. “In certain clubs, we’ve seen excessive control from oligarchs,” he said. “I think that’s something that countries that have that level of investment will have to reflect on.” In Britain the Russian billionaire Roman Abramovich, who vehemently denies that he is close to Vladimir Putin, has scrambled to sell Chelsea amid speculation over whether he would be named in sanctions.