From a commuter town to a ski commute, Sara Hayden travelled the world before finding the perfect work-life balance in Norway. Originally from Ashbourne, in Co Meath, Hayden studied science in UCD after finishing school in 2001. “I completed a four-year degree in zoology, followed by a masters and a PhD in molecular biology, under the supervision of Prof Emma Teeling. “It involved executing and analysing laboratory experiments to explore olfactory receptor gene diversity in mammals including species selection, DNA extraction, PCR and cloning and DNA sequence analysis. “I also managed multidisciplinary science projects with internal and external scientists from multidisciplinary fields and presented research at national and international meetings, winning several awards for best oral presentation.” As a trained scientist, she left UCD in 2011, a decade after starting her academic journey, and took up a position as a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Washington in Seattle. “My research position saw me conduct cell biology research and analysis of protein transport within photoreceptors, as well as cloning. I also prepared technical reports of laboratory work, while editing scientific manuscripts and surprising undergrad and graduate researchers.” Despite her academic successes, Hayden used her time in Seattle to examine other opportunities. US visa “Seattle is a massive technology hub and global corporations are based there. I spent a lot of time networking and trying to discover careers outside of academia. I really wanted a job and a US visa, but found it difficult to get sponsored. Timing of sponsorship and recruitment are crucial in the application process.” After failed attempts and unfortunate timing, in 2014 she decided to join her now husband in Japan. “He works in cancer immunotherapy and we met in Seattle. His research position took him to the island of Shikoku, the smallest of Japan’s major islands. “I had no job when I landed there but was lucky enough to find a teaching position at the Ehime Prefectural University of Health Sciences. I worked in the medical department, teaching and coaching students in English and presentation skills as well as teaching specialist medical language.” Her time in Japan also offered an opportunity to learn the language, immerse herself in local culture and discover the hidden slopes of Japan’s backcountry. “I stayed in Japan for a year, benefiting from the cultural experience and skiing, but it made me contemplate my next career move and I decided to go back to Ireland in 2015 to work with BSM Lean Consultants, which offers consultancy services to pharmaceutical and life science companies globally.” “My job saw me run data models to evaluate productivity potentials in unique laboratory environments, and lead workshops. I worked as an operational excellence consultant, utilising project management and communication skills to facilitate global projects,” After Hayden’s husband moved to Ireland from Japan, the couple contemplated their next move. “He’s Australian and, because we weren’t married at the time, it proved more difficult to acquire a visa for work [in Ireland Vanderlande in 2019. The company installs automated material handling systems across Scandinavia, and Hayden leads a service delivery team. “I get to use my Norwegian and benefit from a healthy work-life balance,” she says. “Norway is a world leader in work-life balance. You can be gone from the office by 4pm or midday on Friday and no one would bat an eyelid. I know things are changing in Ireland too, but they are well ahead [in Norway].” “We live just outside Oslo. In winter, you can go cross-country skiing after work as we are so close to the hills and forests. It’s affordable too. You pay a small annual levy and then you can go in the evenings as the trails are lit up. “The fresh air is fantastic after a day behind the desk. Because Oslo is on a fjord, there are endless outdoor opportunities in winter as in summer. There’s always something to do outside and I really appreciate that the outdoors is part of life here.” Hayden connected with the Irish community and is involved in setting up the Irish Norwegian Chamber of Commerce. “The Chamber is focused on driving the green transition in Ireland and Norway by connecting innovative companies across all industries in both countries. “This is the first time I’ve lived abroad and connected with Irish people and it’s really great. There’s a great community of Irish people here doing lots of interesting work.” Hayden says life in Norway is just as you would imagine it to be. “Norway is a great place to live, especially if you’re raising a family. It’s a very equal society, where both men and women get equal childcare leave, promoting gender balance in the home and the workplace.”