In another positive move for disabled golfers, the first ever Irish Open for Golfers with a Disability the first ever Irish Open for Golfers with a Disability will take place at Roganstown in north county Dublin on July 5th-6th. The tournament is part of Golf Ireland’s 2022-2026 strategic plan, one of the objectives of that strategy being to “deliver a clear, streamlined, inclusive and equitable event calendar, including disability and development competitions”. Of the Irish Open joining the EGDA schedule, Gerri Houlihan, Golf Ireland’s disability & inclusion committee chair , commented: “We are delighted to be bringing this event to Ireland. It will be a fantastic opportunity for the very talented golfers with disabilities we have on the island of Ireland to play on home soil showcasing their amazing talent inspired by home support. I hope this tournament will encourage other golfers with a disability to participate and engage in the game at all levels.” President of EDGA and head of disability and inclusion for the International Golf Federation Tony Bennett added: “This first Irish Open for Golfers with a Disability will likely become the cornerstone for an increasing number of outreach programmes, and more opportunities for golfers with a disability as clubs and provinces join to make golf the most inclusive of all sports.” Nelly Korda recovering after blood clot diagnosis Just two weeks before the season’s first Major – the Chevron Championship – Nelly Korda, the world’s No 2 ranked player, has revealed she is recovering a health scare. Korda, who was in Florida last week for a commercial photo shoot, announced in a public statement that he was doing a morning workout on Friday when her arm “started to feel like it was swelling”. After consulting with her doctor, the 23-year-old was advised to attend the emergency department of the hospital in Ponte Vedra where she was diagnosed with a blood clot in one of her arms. “I will communicate my status as and when there is more information,” said Korda, who had opted to skip the two-tournament Asia Swing in Singapore and Thailand and was scheduled to reappear on tour at next week’s JTCB Classic in Carlsbad, California. Word of Mouth “I’m not sure I’m going to get an Annika career, no one really is. But I’m very excited about this [win], I’m sure there will be more to come” – Nanna Koertz Madsen of being inspired growing up by Annika Sorenstam (winner of 72 LPGA Tour titles, including 10 Majors) after the Dane won her first LPGA Tour title in the Honda Thailand tournament. By the Numbers: 107 Shane Lowry’s Srixon golf ball left the club face at 107 miles per hour for his wedge tee-shot to the 17th hole in his third round of The Players at TPC Sawgrass on Sunday, where the Irishman’s hole-in-one became the 10th at the famous island hole in the tournament’s history. On this day: March 15th, 2010 Derek Lamely’s moment in the spotlight arrived in the Puerto Rico Open at Trump International, where the American – in his rookie season on the PGA Tour – emerged as the winner of a rain-delayed tournament on a sodden course to close with a 66 for a total of 19-under-par 269 for a two-strokes winning margin over Kris Blanks. Lamely – who earned a career best payday of $630,000 – started the final round four strokes behind 54-hole leader Kevin Sutherland but emerged from the pack with his strong finish and had to wait for over two hours, watching on TV, until his victory was confirmed. “I just kept on trying to make birdies, kept on trying to be aggressive,” said Lamely, who got to meet the legendary Puerto Rican golfer Chi Chi Rodriquez at the presentation ceremony. “I’m still a rookie out here, even though I just won. There’s tons I can learn still.” Unfortunately for Lamely, that success proved to be his only one on the PGA Tour and he never again even managed a top-10 finish. In the Bag: Pablo Larrazabal (MyGolfLife Open) Driver: Callaway Rogue ST Triple Diamond S Driver (10.5 degrees) 3-wood: Callaway Epic Speed (15 degrees) 5-wood: Callaway Epic Speed (18 degrees) Utility: Callaway X Forged UT (24 degrees) Irons: Callaway Apex TCB 21 (4-7), Callaway Apex MB 21 (8-PW) Wedges: Callaway Mack Daddy 4 (48 and 60 degrees) Putter: Odyssey Toulon Las Vegas Ball: Chrome Soft X 22 Twitter Twaddle We’ve 300+ golf courses in Ire. and some of them are donating their w/e competition fees to GOALs #Ukraine emergency appeal. I’ll match that sum this weekend. Hopefully more courses will come on board and fundraise for GOAL, our Irish sports charity – Pádraig Harrington We are excited to announce @OliviaMehaffey as one of the 2022 Carlisle Classic’s Sponsor Exemption! Congratulations Olivia, we can’t wait to see how you play – Carlisle Classic on the Co Down player’s exemption into this week’s event on the Epson Tour, which will be Olivia Mehaffey’s first start of the season. Today was basically the worst day ever to play a golf tourney at Sawgrass but seemed like the best day ever to watch one. I was v jealous of the spectators – Max Homa on the tough weather conditions that players faced in Saturday’s play at The Players. Know the Rules Q In a match, Player B has completed the hole in five strokes. Player A, who has a putt for a five, inquires as to B’s score for the hole and B mistakenly states he has holed out in four strokes. A picks up his ball without marking its position. B then corrects his mistake. What is the ruling? A Player B loses the hole for telling his opponent the wrong number of strokes and not correcting before the ball was lifted (Rule 3.2d(1)).