Ukrainian president Volodymr Zelenskiy accused Russia on Wednesday of carrying out an air strike that severely damaged a children’s hospital in the southern port city of Mariupol. Children were among people “under the wreckage”, he said, without giving details of casualties. Mariupol’s city council said the hospital had been destroyed. It said it did not know any casualty figures but added: “The destruction is colossal.” The reports could not immediately be verified by Reuters. Russia has denied targeting civilians in its assault on Ukraine. “Direct strike of Russian troops at the maternity hospital. People, children are under the wreckage,” Mr Zelenskiy said on Twitter. “Atrocity! How much longer will the world be an accomplice ignoring terror? Close the sky right now! Stop the killings! You have power but you seem to be losing humanity.” The Ukrainian Foreign Ministry carried video footage on Twitter of what appeared to be the badly damaged hospital under the headline: “Today, Russia shelled a Children’s hospital and a Maternity hospital in Mariupol.” The footage showed holes where windows should have been in what appeared to be a badly damaged three-storey building at the hospital, and huge piles of rubble, some of it smouldering. Ukraine had earlier on Wednesday accused Russia of breaking a ceasefire to prevent the evacuation of hundreds of thousands of civilians trapped in Mariupol, where the Red Cross has described conditions as “apocalyptic”. Russia said it would hold fire to let civilians flee besieged cities, but efforts to evacuate Mariupol appeared to have failed again, as have several previous attempts since Saturday. Chernobyl Radioactive substances could be released from Ukraine’s Chernobyl nuclear power plant because it cannot cool spent nuclear fuel after its power connection was severed, Ukraine’s state-run nuclear company Energoatom said on Wednesday. It said fighting made it impossible to immediately repair the high-voltage power line to the plant, which was captured by Russian forces after the Kremlin launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine on February 24th. Energoatom said there were about 20,000 spent fuel assemblies at Chernobyl that could not be kept cool amid a power outage. Their warming could lead to “the release of radioactive substances into the environment. The radioactive cloud could be carried by wind to other regions of Ukraine, Belarus, Russia, and Europe, ” it said in a statement. Without power, ventilation systems at the plant would also not be working, exposing staff to dangerous doses of radiation, it added. On Tuesday, the UN nuclear watchdog warned that the systems monitoring nuclear material at the radioactive waste facilities at Chernobyl had stopped transmitting data. Ceasefire Russia announced a new ceasefire in Ukraine on Wednesday to let civilians flee besieged cities, after days of mostly failed promises that have left hundreds of thousands trapped without access to medicine or fresh water. Wednesday’s announcement of “silence” was similar to one on Tuesday that promised safe passage from the cities of Kyiv, Kharkiv, Chernihiv, Sumy and Mariupol. So far, only one corridor has been opened, out of Sumy on Tuesday. Ukraine said it too had agreed to halt fire between 9am. and 9pm to let civilians escape besieged cities through six corridors. In a televised statement, deputy prime minister Iryna Vereshchuk called on Moscow to observe local ceasefires. The greatest alarm has been sounded over Mariupol, a southern port totally surrounded by Russian troops for more than a week, where the Red Cross has described the situation faced by civilians as “apocalyptic”. Residents there have been sheltering underground from relentless bombardment, unable to evacuate their wounded, and with no access to food, water, power or heat. A series of local ceasefires to let them leave have failed since Saturday. Kyiv said 30 buses and eight trucks of supplies failed to reach it on Tuesday after they came under Russian shelling in violation of the ceasefire. Moscow has blamed Kyiv for failing to halt fire. In Ukraine’s two biggest cities, Kyiv and Kharkiv, Russia’s safe passage offer would force civilians to go to Russia itself or its ally Belarus, proposals rejected by Kyiv. Fighter jets The Pentagon has dismissed Poland’s plan to hand the US its MiG-29 fighter jets to boost Ukraine’s fight against Russia, as Moscow officials said they were ready to provide humanitarian corridors on Wednesday morning for people fleeing Kyiv and four other cities. Washington appeared surprised by the announcement by Polish foreign minister, Zbigniew Rau, who said on Tuesday that his government was “ready to deploy – immediately and free of charge – all their MiG-29 jets to the Ramstein airbase and place them at the disposal of the government of the United States of America.” The Pentagon appeared to reject the proposal, saying it was not “tenable”. In a statement, the US department of defence said the prospect of the jets departing from the base in Germany “to fly into airspace that is contested with Russia over Ukraine raises serious concerns for the entire Nato alliance”. “We will continue to consult with Poland and our other Nato allies about this issue and the difficult logistical challenges it presents, but we do not believe Poland’s proposal is a tenable one,” John Kirby, the Pentagon press secretary, said. The Polish incident has exposed cracks in the Nato alliance which the Biden administration has struggled to keep in lockstep in the face of the Russian invasion. Vice-president Kamala Harris is due to hold talks with the Polish government in Warsaw on Thursday where she will attempt to repair some of the diplomatic damage. – Agencies