US Congressman Richard E Neal has been awarded the Kennedy-Lemass Medal by the American Chamber of Commerce Ireland “in recognition of his tireless work” to bring peace to the island of Ireland and “deepen the bonds of friendship between the US and Ireland”. The Kennedy-Lemass Medal honours US citizens of Irish heritage who have made a significant contribution to the US-Ireland relationship. Mr Neal has served in the United States House of Representatives since 1989. The medal is named in honour of president John F Kennedy and taoiseach Seán Lemass, in recognition of the transformative impact on the US-Ireland relationship of President Kennedy’s visit to Ireland in June 1963 and Lemass’s return visit to the US in that October. These visits symbolised a shift in the US-Ireland relationship and Ireland’s international trading relationships. Immigrants Mr Neal said: “For generations, Irish immigrants, including my own, have flocked to the United States with an unwavering determination to make a better life for themselves and their families. To this day, our country’s fabric is woven with their stories, hard work, and enduring spirit. “It is because of my ancestors, who fled subjugation and famine to become part of the American mosaic, that I have been able to play a role in the US-Ireland peace process. It was with great pride that I accept this award from the American Chamber of Commerce Ireland on their behalf.” Chamber chief executive Mark Redmond said Ireland could not have a more committed and steadfast friend on Capitol Hill. “Throughout his distinguished career in high political office, he has worked tirelessly to bring peace and equality of opportunity to all the people on the island of Ireland – the land of his forebears,” he said. “Inspired to enter public service by hearing President Kennedy speak on the 1960 presidential campaign, there can be no greater example of the leadership recognised by the Kennedy-Lemass Medal than that demonstrated by Chairman Neal.”