Max Rocha, the 32-year-old chef and son of fashion designer John Rocha, is one of five new entries to the 2022 Murphia List, an annual compilation of the top performing Irish industry figures in London’s food and drink scene, published by the hospitality website Hot Dinners. He is joined in the line up by hotelier and developer Paddy McKillen; executive pastry chef Niamh Larkin; bakery owner Dee Rettali, and speciality coffee shop founder James Hennebry. The new additions bring to 55 the number of entries on the list, which also includes well known personalities including Ballivor-born restaurateur and chef Richard Corrigan, whose plans for 2022 include opening a new restaurant in Camden; Tallagh chef Anna Haugh, who combines TV presenting (Saturday Kitchen and Ready, Steady, Cook) with running her Chelsea restaurant, Myrtle, and Robin and Sarah Gill, who have restaurants and bars across London and whose next opening will be a wine bar in Brixton. Rocha, who was born in Dublin, opened Café Cecilia in Hackney last August, having worked as a chef at The River Cafe, St John Bread & Wine and Spring. The restaurant, which is named after his paternal grandmother, was an immediate hit with the critics. Before opening Café Cecilia, he specialised in catering for art and fashion shoots, with a client list that includes Gucci, Balenciaga, Margaret Howell, and his sister, the designer Simone Rocha. He says his “greatest inspiration comes from growing up in Ireland” and that his food is influenced by the cooking of his mum, Odette. Niamh Larkin, who grew up on a dairy farm in Limerick, is executive pastry chef at 45 Park Lane, part of the Dorchester Collection of hotels. Her first kitchen job was at the Dunraven Arms in Adare, and she has risen through the ranks to head the pastry kitchen at this five-star property, which has an outpost of CUT, the steak restaurant brand originally developed by celebrity chef Wolfgang Puck in Beverly Hills. Dee Rettali was born in north Cork, but has lived in London since the 1980s. She founded Patisserie Organic in 1998, and opened Fortitude Bakehouse, in Bloomsbury, in 2018. Her first book, Baking with Fortitude, published last October, has been shortlisted for the André Simon awards. Kilkenny-born James Hennebry moved on from a career in the music industry to carve a niche in the speciality coffee world. He honed his craft in Melbourne and returned to London to work for Caravan Coffee Roasters. In 2018 he co-founded Rosslyn Coffee in the City of London with his business partner Mat Russell. Last week the Financial Times included Rosslyn as the only UK entry in a list of the Best Independent Coffee Shops in the World. Coffeewerk+Press in Galway were also included in the global compilation. Rosslyn will soon open a third outlet in London. Paddy McKillen of The Maybourne Group also makes the 2022 Murphia List. The Belfast-born property developer and hotelier’s portfolio includes London hospitality landmarks, Claridges, The Berkeley and The Connaught. According to the Murphia List citation, the trio extended hospitality beyond their front doors during the pandemic. “The hotels led the way when it came to showing support for the city’s frontline workers.” Leading French pastry chef Cédric Grolet recently opened his first patisserie outside of France at The Berkeley. The Murphia List, sponsored by Bord Bia, is in its eighth year and is produced by Hot Dinners, the London food and restaurant website founded in 2009 by Irish-born siblings Gavin and Catherine Hanly. Chefs NEW: Max Rocha, Cafe Cecilia NEW: Niamh Larkin, 45 Park Lane Kenneth Culhane, The Dysart Nick Fitzgerald, Tacos Padre Fiona Hannon, Bentley’s Anna Haugh, Myrtle Colin Kelly, The Twenty Two Marguerite Keogh, The Five Fields Dave McCarthy, Scott’s Patrick Powell, Allegra Clare Smyth MBE, Core by Clare Smyth Restaurateurs Sinead Campbell, Bong Bong’s Manila Kanteen Richard Corrigan, Corrigan Collection John Devitt, Koya Garrett Fitzgerald, Butchies Robin and Sarah Gill, Various Brian Hannon, Various John King, Bowling Bird David Moore, Pied a Terre John Nugent, Green & Fortune Ciara O’Shea and Ken Nally, F Mondays Oliver Peyton, Peyton & Byrne Mark and Alan Wogan, Homeslice Pubs, bars and cafes Gearoid Devaney, Black Book Cormac Gibney, Gibney’s NEW: James Hennebry, Rosslyn Coffee Joseph Ryan, Cellar Boys Brewery Aaron Wall and Ciarán Smith, Homeboy Front of House Richie Corrigan, Daffodil Mulligan Conor Daly, The George Fergal Lee, The Wolseley - general manager Shane McHugh, Goodman - head sommelier Alex Muir, Sketch Oisin Rogers, The Guinea Grill and The Windmill Joe Warwick, Sola Media Jessica Corrigan, Crab Communications Diana Henry, food writer and broadcaster Niamh Shields, Eat like a girl Behind the scenes Molly Hutchinson, MIAM Management and Meatopia Fiona Leahy, Fiona Leahy Designs Sinead Mallozzi, sketch NEW: Paddy McKillen, Maybourne Group Producers and retailers James Goggin, Empirical Simon Lamont and Phil Coulter, Rocks Oysters Evin O’Riordain, The Kernel Brewery Darragh O’Shea, O’Shea’s Butchers Steve Ryan, 40FT Brewery NEW: Dee Rettali, Fortitude Bakery Rising Stars Conor Bartley, The Bottle Cocktail Shop Aaron Flynn, New Lounge Manager at Claridge’s