One of south Co Dublin’s prettiest roads, Richmond Hill, climbs away from from busy Monkstown village. Number 1, a detached villa-style residence, shares a driveway with what was once its coach house, and has a sizeable back garden that extends to 27m. Its owners bought it in 2017, paying €925,000, according to the Property Price Register and set about refurbishing it and reconfiguring the layout to take advantage of the light-filled rooms at entrance level where the ceiling heights are 3.7m. They installed central heating, rewired, repaired the roof, refurbished and refitted all the windows, and refurbished the floors and fireplaces. It is accessed via a set of granite steps and opens into a porch and hall. The kitchen is now to the left with contemporary white units and a sleek island set in front of the fireplace. Above it hangs a huge moon pendant by David Groppi, bought at Minima by owner Bláthnaid Kelly O’Neill, that looks heavenly when lit. She’s an interior design consultant who has worked with private clients for more than 20 years. The rooms fizz with personality, from the designer furniture to the colourful objects and artworks. On the mantel, for example, is a series of statement ceramic heads and the eat-in area overlooks the south-facing front garden. Arranged around a circular Neptune table is a modern take on the harlequin set of dining chairs. Here are upscale Bold chairs by Moustache with primary yellow seating by Ikea. Off the kitchen is a pantry where French doors open out to a sun-filled patio. Across the hall is the formal drawing room. Every corner of this dual-aspect space is filled with talking point art, lights and furniture but none of these are fixed, so if you’re a fan of a white-cube space you can have that. On offer are period features, volume and lots of light. Up on the return is the main bedroom and a guest toilet. The bedroom has a sizeable ante room that is used as a walk-in wardrobe but would also work as a very smart en suite bathroom. Down a level from the entrance hall – this is a house with a lot of stairs – is the family bathroom and a fine family room, which could also be another bedroom. At garden level, down another set of steps, there are two very large double bedrooms that share a smart shower room with sanitryware by Philippe Starck for Alessi. One also has a study area that opens out to another terrace. On the far side of this floor is a side entrance through a very smartly appointed utility room. Older children will love being able to tramp directly into their rooms before showing their faces to their parents. A half level below again are the fourth double bedroom and adjoining office. The ceiling heights here are lower but will give a teenager a sense of their own sacred space, far from the rest of the house. Lisney is seeking €1.85 million for the four/five-bedroom property, which is Ber exempt and extends to 220sq m (2,368sq ft).