St Patrick’s Festival March 16th-20th, Dublin and all across Ireland, stpatricksfestival.ie You read it right: our national festival is back after a two-year hiatus, and we can once again don our green wigs and leprechaun hats and head out to celebrate Paddy’s Day in person. We haven’t quite driven Covid out of Ireland, but the parades and celebrations will go on, and hopefully the worst we’ll end up with is a bit of a hangover from the green beer. The centrepiece is of course the Dublin parade, which is promised to be the biggest and most ambitious yet – it even has its own “International Guest of Honour” in the form of American actor John C Reilly. The parade will be led by Ireland’s best-loved space cadet, little Adam King, who will be handing out his famous virtual hugs from his very own parade space shuttle. The National Museum of Ireland at Collins Barracks will be renamed the Festival Quarter and from March 17th will feature live music, circus performers, céilí dancing and storytelling, with events at the Spiegeltent Mór and the Story Yurt. Nighttime will see grown-up gigs by Damien Dempsey, Mango + Mathman and Lyra, but really, we’re all going to be like big kids for this very welcome and long-overdue four-day blowout. The Lion, the Witch and The Wardrobe March 15th-19th, Bord Gáis Energy Theatre, Dublin, 2.30pm and 7.30pm, bordgaisenergytheatre.ie CS Lewis’s enchanting story may not quite have the epic quality of his pal JRR Tolkien’s Middle Earth trilogy, but the Narnia books were charming children’s adventures with a strong moral compass. This exciting and colourful production has wowed West End audiences and now goes on tour, bringing audiences through the wardrobe and into a magical land filled with fauns and other semi-mythical creatures. Alas, Narnia is under the spell of the evil White Witch, and now it’s always winter but never Christmas. But the animals await the return of the benevolent, all-powerful lion named Aslan to restore order. Director Sally Cookson and designer Rae Smith have turned the stage into a wonderland, with spectacular puppetry and aerial acrobatics, and a fine cast led by Samantha Womack as the White Witch. Fatboy Slim March 16th, 3 Arena, Dublin, ticketmaster.ie What better way to bookend our national holiday than with big shows from that icon of 1990s Cool Britannia, Norman Cook? The superstar DJ dons his Hawaiian shirt once again for gigs in Dublin’s 3Arena and Belfast’s SSE Arena on either side of Paddy’s Day – so get ready for a big beat carnival that will send 50,000 volts through Anglo-Irish relations. Cook has dabbled with pop stardom, but he says he’s at his most comfortable behind the decks, getting the party started wherever he spins. He’s been DJ-ing for 40 years now, and still has the thirst for turntable thrills, so don’t expect him to be just hitting play on the greatest hits CD and sitting back with a nice cuppa tea. “When I’ve got my shirt on, I have to give it my all as a performer and a showman and, you know, as a professional idiot,” he says, so get ready to leave his shows grinning like an idiot. X’ntigone after Sophocles March 16th-26th, Abbey Theatre, Dublin 8pm (Saturday matinee 2.30pm), €18-€25/€10-€20, abbeytheatre.ie Something is rotten in the state of ancient Greece, and this new reading of Sophocles’s age-old tale promises to shed light on events of recent times. Thebes is in the midst of a terrible pandemic that has killed millions and wrecked the economy, but vaccinations hold out a promise of coming out of lockdown and celebrating the Festival of Liberty. However, Thebes’s ruler, Creon, faces an unlikely adversary: his own daughter, who now styles herself X’ntigone and is on a mission to tear down the old order and establish a new world vision. Darren Murphy has written this contemporary telling, with Emma Jordan directing. The Mary Wallopers March 17th, Vicar St, Dublin, 7.30pm The Dundalk folk trio of Sean McKenna and brothers Charles and Andrew Hendy were all set to play their biggest ever headline gig back in December, but then Christmas got cancelled due to some flipping virus. They may not have been able to do the Santa thing, but they can now don the green shirt with a St Patrick’s Day gig at Dublin’s Vicar St, and they’ll be bringing along their ever-bulging songbook, filled with songs they’ve written and quirky tunes they’ve collected on their travels around the country. These punked-up balladeers describe themselves as The Clancy Brothers meet John Lydon, so we’re expecting a raucously good time from these tub-thumping troubadours. Outrage March 17th-19th, Kells Courthouse, Kells, Co Meath, 7.30pm, €16 Deirdre Kinahan’s hard-hitting new play, directed by Jim Culleton and starring Mary Murray and Naoise Dunbar, tells the story of two sisters and the challenges and choices they faces in the Civil War of 1922. Alice and Nell are doing their bit to organise civic resistance, but as the country spirals towards civil war, the sisters are torn by conflicting ideals and beliefs. While writing the play, Kinahan looked at the true-life testimonies of women activists during that era, and Outrage challenges much of the received wisdom of that period in Irish history, looking at it from a women’s perspective and finding empathy and truth in the unlikeliest places. It’s part of Fishamble’s ongoing work to mark the Decade of Centenaries, and will move to the Pumphouse in Dublin Port from March 24-April 3. Love Is a Stranger March 19th, The Grainhouse, Ballymaloe, Co Cork, 2pm, €35/€50 (family ticket), anotherlovestory.ie With a Eurythmical title, this one-day festival of music, food and good vibes is worth checking out for the location alone, a 17th-century barn complex that’s perfect for spreading your wings and flying it. Add in a fab musical line-up of Conor O’Brien aka Villagers, London/west Cork groove machine K3:lu, the beguiling Anna Mieke and the folktastic Junior Brother, and you’ve got plenty to be getting on with throughout the day. There are also a few fascinating talks lined up, including Siobhan Kane chatting to Cork writer Danny Denton, and a listening party and Q&A with Paul McDermott, whose documentary on the late Andrew Weatherall, Sail We Must, tracks the connections between the superstar DJ and Cork. And don’t worry – there’ll be delicious street food from Wildside Catering and lovely grub from the Ballymaloe Cafe to keep you going through the day. The Blades March 19th Academy, Dublin 7pm €30, ticketmaster.ie Amazing how time flies. The Blades have been reunited for nearly 10 years now, and bringing the good vibes from Raytown to all corners of the land once again. Then Covid hit, and Paul Cleary, Brian Foley and Jake Reilly had to go back into the punk cryogenic chamber once again for another couple of years. Now, they’re back on the beat with their rescheduled headliner at the Academy, and believe me, they won’t look (or sound) like they’ve aged a day. ''We can't wait to play again after a long two-year absence, we're determined to make this one of our best ever shows, it's the least our supporters deserve,'' says Cleary. Will we miss this one? Not a ghost of a chance. Hans Zimmer March 20th, 3Arena, Dublin, 7.30pm, from €67, ticketmaster.ie The Oscar, Grammy and Golden Globe-winning composer brings his delayed Europe tour to the 3Arena, and boy has he got some repertoire to choose from on the night, not least his most recent film scores for No Time to Die and Dune. The ever-sprightly Zimmer will be bringing his full band and orchestra to perform acclaimed music from such classic movies as Dunkirk, Gladiator, the Dark Knight trilogy, Inception, Blade Runner 2049, Thelma and Louise and 12 Years a Slave. Zimmer doesn’t do aloof maestro – he’ll be centre stage as player, host and musical director; and completely reinventing the format of performing film music live.