In yet another indication of what makes the Allianz Football League such a compelling competition, the penultimate round of games has settled virtually nothing. Kerry will be in the Division One final, almost certainly – but not quite definitely – against either Mayo or Armagh. Every other team in the top division could be relegated next Sunday, with the only certainty being that whoever loses in Clones between Monaghan and Dublin is gone. Otherwise, it’s going to be a busy time for the calculators-at-the-ready people. Kerry’s 1-13 to 0-13 win on the road in Armagh nailed down their passage to the final, with David Clifford’s goal the difference. In Croke Park, Dublin’s revival from the foot of the table continued apace with a 2-15 to 2-10 win over Donegal. In Newbridge, Kildare got their first home win over Ulster opposition in the top division since 2008 with a 0-24 to 1-12 win over Monaghan. That heavy defeat leaves Seamus McEnaney’s side stuck to the foot of the table with only one win to their name and the worst points difference in the division. If they are to escape relegation and continue the third longest unbroken spell in the top flight after those belonging to Kerry and Dublin, Monaghan will have to beat Dessie Farrell’s side at home next week. Relegation decider Down the leagues, the various pictures aren’t a whole pile clearer. Galway sealed their passage to next year’s Division One with a comprehensive win in Derry, while Down’s defeat away to Cork has relegated them with a game to go. The other promotion spot will go to either Derry or Roscommon, while Cork and Offaly meet in a de-facto relegation decider in Tullamore next weekend. Division Three is still up in the air, with Louth, Limerick, Antrim, Westmeath and Fermanagh all still in the promotion hunt. At the other end, Wicklow look to have the toughest task, needing a win against table-toppers Louth next week, while Longford and Laois face off to avoid filling the other spot. Incredibly, four teams are still in with a shout in a madcap Division Four. Cavan only a had a point to spare against London, just as Sligo could only win by one against a Waterford team who finished their game with 11 men. Cavan, Sligo, Tipperary and Leitrim all go into next weekend with promotion a live possibility. In full, only eight counties across all four divisions go into next weekend without something to play for. Only the league.