1. Hilton Leading global hospitality company with a portfolio of 18 world-class brands comprising more than 6,500 properties and more than one million rooms, in 119 countries and territories.      Years on list: 2     hilton.com/en/locations/ireland/ 2. Distilled Leader in online marketplaces in Ireland, made up of Adverts.ie, Daft.ie, and DoneDeal.ie.     Years on list: 5     distilled.ie 3. Cloudera International Limited Helping innovative organizations across all industries tackle transformational use cases and real-time insights.     Years on list: New     cloudera.com 4. Adobe Systems Global leader in digital media and digital marketing solutions. Bringing digital creations to life.     Years on list: 2     adobe.com/ie/ 5. Udemy Ireland Global marketplace for teaching and learning, connecting millions of students to the skills they need to succeed.     Years on list: New     udemy.com 6. Cadence Electronic design automation software provider, transforming the way people design next-gen systems.     Years on list: 8     cadence.com 7. Genesys Leader for omnichannel customer experience & contact center solutions, trusted by 10000+ companies.     Years on list: New genesys.com 8. Informatica Enterprise Cloud Data Management leader that accelerates data-driven digital transformation.     Years on list: 4     informatica.com 9. Horizon Therapeutics Global biopharma company that believes science and compassion must work together to transform lives.     Years on list: 3     horizontherapeutics.com 10. DHL Global Forwarding (Ireland) Ltd Forwarding experts with global reach and local knowledge, providing a broad range of freight solutions.     Years on list: 2     dhl.com/ie-en/ 11. Fiserv Nenagh Leading global technology provider for the financial services industry, driving innovation.     Years on list: 4     fiserv.com 12. IPB Insurance Wholly Irish-owned and the only indigenous mutual general insurance company in the Irish market.     Years on list: 5     ipb.ie 13. Liberty IT Designing and developing innovative technology solutions for an ever-evolving digital world.     Years on list: 6     liberty-it.ie 14. Asana Platform that helps teams to orchestrate their work, from small projects to strategic initiatives.     Years on list: 3     asana.com 15. CACI Non-Life Arm of specialist provider covering life, property/casualty and borrower insurance.     Years on list: 6     ca-caci.ie 16. Toast Powering restaurants with a platform that combines restaurant POS and guest-facing technology.     Years on list: New    toasttab.com 17. Irish Rugby Football Union Governing body for rugby union on the island of Ireland, responsible for all aspects of the game.     Years on list: 3     irishrugby.ie 18. Portwest Head Office Leader of the design and manufacture of high-quality Workwear, Footwear, and Personal Protective Equipment.     Years on list: 3     portwest.com 19. MSD Dunboyne MSD’s first Biologics Drug Substance Single Use Commercialisation Facility. Years on list: 3     jobs.msd.com/gb/en/ireland-dunboyne 20. Squarespace Modern platform that enables millions to build a brand & share stores in an impactful online presence.     Years on list: 3     squarespace.com 21. 3Dental Offering a comprehensive range of professional and affordable dental treatment.     Years on list: 4     3dental.ie 22. Volkswagen Group Ireland Responsible for Sales, Distribution, Marketing, and Public Relations of Volkswagen and other brands.     Years on list: 7     volkswagen.ie 23. Northside Home Care Services Professional Home Care provider with a thirty-year presence in the North Dublin Community.     Years on list: 2     northsidehomecare.ie 24. Equinix Enabling today’s businesses to access all the right places, partners and possibilities they need.     Years on list: New     equinix.com 25. Global Shares Manages employee stock plans for some of the world’s biggest and most exciting companies.      Years on list: 2     globalshares.com 26. Midlands Park Hotel 4-star hotel in Portlaoise which treats every single aspect of the guest experience with exceptional care.     Years on list: New     midlandsparkhotel.com 27. Meaghers Pharmacy Retailer providing a selection of pharmacy, beauty, and health related products and services.     Years on list: 3     meagherspharmacy.ie 28. Edwards Lifesciences Global leader in patient-focused medical innovations for structural heart disease, as well as critical care.     Years on list: 2     edwards.com 29. ATA Tools Ltd Leading manufacturer of tungsten carbide burs, industrial air tools and speciality abrasive products.      Years on list: New    atagroup.com How to become one of Ireland's Best Workplaces? To be qualified for Ireland's Best Workplaces recognition, organisations must be Great Place to Work-Certified first. To discover how to Get Certified, visit www.greatplacetowork.ie