Bohemians 1 Shelbourne 1 Disciplined Shelbourne voided Bohemians’ initial signs of superiority with a counterattacking goal by Seán Boyd a wonderful 24 seconds after the striker was sprung from the bench. Boyd’s only contribution on the night, created by the excellent Shane Farrell, set up the mother of all smash and grab victories. Instead, Bohs sprung to life with Grant Horton scrambling a late equaliser that doubled as the centre half’s first for the club. The score draw leaves both teams mired together in mid-table on six points. Until the hectic run-in, the game had failed to match its preamble as Bohs, “the people’s club” for those a wondering, and “fan owned since 1890” happily tweeted “X to Oligarchs, X to Corrupt Regimes, X to Billionaires” in the lead-up to kick-off. The replies produced a stream of comedy from everyone else. Good clean fun before a north Dublin derby that is steeped in history. Ancient and recent history about Dalymount Park and Bob Marley. The history of two clubs operating off different business models and alternative dealings with Dublin City Council. Bohs are the settled club as much as Shels know only turmoil for a decade. Bohs just went to the cup final, Shels just won the First Division, before emptying their squad and giving Damien Duff the keys to Tolka Park. Signing Boyd from Finn Harps looks more astute than Dan Carr, the man he eventually replaced. Bohs might have the House of Marley’s stamp of approval but Shels have Duffer’s unrequited love. That was the backdrop to a Monday night in March at sold-out Dalymount, soon to be demolished and replaced with a modern stadium that Shelbourne’s board hope to replicate two kilometers across the Royal Canal – eventually. Off-pitch politicking threatened to fill this report as the opening 45 minutes lacked any sort of cohesive play. At least Duff’s charges are willing to run themselves into the ground to prove that a lack of quality, especially with Jack Moylan injured, need not obstruct their aim of mid-table respectability when the Airtricity League calms into contenders, also-rans and those doomed for relegation. The systems employed by either manager appeared to create the stalemate. Shels operate the same 3-4-2-1 as Ireland, Chelsea and Shamrock Rovers. Bohs under Keith Long keep the back four intact, attacking through two lines where Dawson Devoy and Promise Omochere are central cogs. Besides Ali Coote’s shooting from distance, it took Bohs most of the first half to threaten Lewis Webb’s goal. The only other incident of note before half-time was a booking for John Ross Wilson after the Shelbourne wing back made contact with goalkeeper James Talbot. Referee Rob Harvey decided that a yellow card was sufficient punishment. The second half almost had us reading up the details of the clubs’ respective planning permission applications. But Shels, to their credit, refused to hand over three points as their back three became a back five that crowded out Omochere while man-marking Coote and Kris Twardek, suffocating the dangerous wingers. At least the intensity never dipped below derby standards. And the late drama began with Rory Feely’s blatant foul on Farrell. Duff swallowed a yellow card for whatever choice words he offered the officials but despite Shels players re-enacting the contact inside the box, a free-kick was the call. Talbot matched the flurry of efforts that followed. Oddly, Bohs lost control of the contest, with Long sensing as much and replacing Jordan Doherty, Twardek and Devoy with Liam Burt, Stephen Mallon and Ryan Cassidy. Duff also sensed the need for change, subbing on Boyd who scored with his first touch after Farrell, who was running riot down the left, delivered a slick pull-back assist. Horton had the last say, but it felt like a point gained for Shels, especially considering Feely’s late dismissal for a second yellow. BOHEMIANS: Talbot; Feely, Horton, Kelly, Wilson (capt); Devoy (Cassidy, 85 mins), Flores, Doherty (Burt, 67 mins); Coote, Twardek (Mallon, 67 mins); Omochere. SHELBOURNE: Webb; Ledwidge, Byrne (capt), O’Driscoll; Wilson, Thomas, McManus, Kane; Dervin, Farrell (McEneff, 80 mins); Carr (Boyd, 74 mins). Referee: Rob Harvey.