A long-awaited public apology to the victims of historical institutional abuse in Northern Ireland is being delivered at Stormont. The public apology was recommended in the final report of the Historical Institutional Abuse Inquiry (HIAI), which was published more than five years ago. The Commissioner for Victims and Survivors of Institutional Childhood Abuse Fiona Ryan acknowledged the pain and suffering of all historical institutional abuse victims and survivors in Northern Ireland. Speaking in the Stormont Assembly chamber, she paid tribute to all who had campaigned for an inquiry into historical institutional abuse. “Let us be clear why we are here today and what is being apologised for. “We are talking about the systemic abuse, sexual abuse, emotional abuse and neglect of children for decades in residential institutions in Northern Ireland. “For this abuse to succeed on this scale requires not only individual abusers and institutions to perpetrate the abuse, but failed oversight and accountability on the part of the public authorities.” Ms Ryan then called for a minute’s silence for victims who died before ministers offered an apology on behalf of the powersharing Executive. The apology was delivered by five ministers, representing each of the main parties, in the absence of a first and deputy first minister. DUP education minister Michelle McIlveen said that victims of historical institutional abuse in Northern Ireland were failed by the state. “Today, we say that we are sorry. “Whilst in the care of the state you were made vulnerable — we did not ensure all our residential homes were filled with love and safety,” she said. “We did not ensure these homes were all free from hunger and cold, from mistreatment and abuse. ‘The state let you down’ “It was the state’s responsibility to do that, and it failed you. “We neglected you, rejected you, we made you feel unwanted. It was not your fault. The state let you down.” Ms McIlveen added: “We recognise that, as adults now and survivors of historical institutional abuse, you carry the effects of that suffering and its continued impact on your daily life. “We apologise to you for the trauma inflicted upon you as children whilst in the care of the state. We are sorry.” has Alliance Party justice minister Naomi Long said that the Assembly chamber at Stormont was a “fitting and proper venue” for the apology to victims of historical institutional abuse. “This is where our laws are made, where we — ministers and those responsible for governing — are held to account. We are united in our acceptance of responsibility. “No-one can undo the past; nor can we undo your past.” Mrs Long continued: “We acknowledge your desire to make sure that future generations of children will never have to suffer the abuse you experienced — we echo that desire and it is our job to make sure that does not happen.” SDLP infrastructure minister Nichola Mallon said no apology to victims of abuse could make up for the failings of the past. “We hope that our clear and outright acknowledgement will bring some relief. “We know that many children suffered greatly as a result of being separated from their families. ‘Guilt and shame’ “Some experienced neglect and emotional, physical and sexual abuse at the hand of those who were supposed to care for them. We know that many of you were exposed to a harsh environment. “That environment had a lasting emotional impact on those exposed to it, including a lifelong feeling of guilt. That is wrong. None of this was of your doing and none of this was your fault. “The guilt and shame of what happened is not, nor has it ever been, your burden to bear. The burden belongs only to us; those who should have protected you.” Ulster Unionist health minister Robin Swann said politicians had learnt a lot from the experiences of victims of historical institutional abuse. “We want to acknowledge all of you who had the courage to speak up and highlight the most horrendous abuse — abuse that no child should have to endure. “This was often done at great personal cost,” he said. “What happened to each and every one of you was wrong. It should not have happened and it is critical that every possible step is taken to ensure that nothing like this happens to any other child in the care of the state — ever again.” Delivering the final apology to victims of historical institutional abuse, Sinn Fein finance minister Conor Murphy said survivors had had to wait too long for an apology. “We acknowledge that the delay in progressing this recommendation from the Hart report has further added to the stress that you experienced. “For this, we are sorry. “You, and all victims and survivors, deserve nothing less than full acknowledgement of the harm inflicted on you as children, and the suffering you have endured throughout your lives as a result of our failures. “The apology we offer you is unconditional. We should have protected you and we did not. We are sorry,” Mr Murphy said. “You were harmed by those who should have cared for you. We are sorry. “You told the truth, yet you were not believed. We are sorry. “We are responsible. And we are so very, very sorry.” Representatives from six organisations which ran the institutions will also offer an apology. They will speak for religious orders De La Salle, Sisters of Nazareth, Sisters of St Louis and the Good Shepherd Sisters — as well as Barnardo’s and the Irish Church Missions. In his report, HIAI chair Sir Anthony Hart outlined a series of recommendations after he revealed shocking levels of sexual, physical and emotional abuse in the period 1922 to 1995. The recommendations included that those abused in state, church and charity run homes should be offered compensation as well as an official apology from government and the organisations which ran the residential facilities where it happened — and a memorial. – PA