Perfect proportions Mathematicians love it, artists swoon over it and, often without realising it, we find it gently pleasing. Now the nicely nerdy team at homedit.com have ranked their Top 10 of Europe’s landmarks that most closely conform to the Golden Ratio – i.e. the best balance of height to width (it’s 1.606 if you want to try it at home). Europe’s most statistically beautiful landmark is the Kyiv Perchersk Lavra. Sadly, while the world is in upheaval, we won’t be visiting the Ukrainian monastery for a while. But in at number two is Barcelona’s Sagrada Familia, with Prague Castle hot on the Gaudi extravaganza’s deliciously abstract heels. Get to Prague for a divinely proportioned mini break aimed at solo travellers, with Cassidy Travel, departing March 23rd, with two nights at the 4-star centrally located Praga 1, just a tram ride away from the castle itself. €299 for one. cassidytravel.ie Throwing shapes in Dublin Ireland’s capital is no slouch either when it comes to keeping things in proportion. So where better to celebrate St Patrick’s Day than with a visit to St Patrick’s Cathedral? The cathedral comes in at number five on the Homedit list of buildings with the best measurements. Visitor tickets are from €6.50 / €7.50, unless you’re attending a service. Or for a truly glorious evening, book for one of their concerts, such as Music From the Movies on March 26th, with tickets from €29 (stpatrickscathedral.ie). Stay within bell-dinging distance at the Hyatt Centric on Dean Street, with room only from €140, or save by signing up to their membership club when booking (hyatt.com). Or stroll down to Stephen’s Green to stay at Stauntons, with rooms from €327 on that Greenest of green days (stauntonsonthegreen.ie). Check out all the St Patrick’s Festival happenings at stpatricksfestival.ie Bent into shape Feeling like a sad wreck of your former luscious self? Wishing you could touch your toes again – or even reach your socks of a morning? Or maybe you’re one of those ultra-flexible people whose idea of holiday heaven is even more exercise… Either way, the three-day wellness weekend at Mayo’s Ice House Hotel sounds like a tonic. Hosted by Audrey O’Connor, you get two nights accommodation, including dinner and breakfast, and a programme that includes Pilates, yoga, stand-up paddleboarding, meditation and an introduction to the delights of journaling – so you can write down how smugly wonderful you feel at the end of it. Runs from April 8th to 10th, from €515pps. icehousehotel.ie Celestial visions I love a good starry sky, but I dream of seeing the full-on Northern Lights. Apparently they flit in and out of these parts, but they’re more like a rumour than a reliable neighbour. While Canada’s Yukon can’t promise, they’re a much surer bet. And with excursions to the Gold Rush town of Skagway, a trip on the White Pass Route Railway, and tours of the Kulane National Park and Whitehorse and the Yukon Wildlife Preserve, Canadian Sky’s 11-night trip sounds like one for the scrapbook. It’s the 125th anniversary of the Klondike gold rush, so the loot is probably all gone by now, but the trip costs from €3,475 including flights, accommodation, transport and excursions. Various departure dates, but book before March 31st for free Dublin Airport lounge access (though we bet that’s not what you’ll remember most). canadiansky.ie