U20 Six Nations: Ireland v Scotland, Musgrave Park, Sunday, 5.0– Live on Virgin Media Two and BBC iPlayer Richie Murphy’s charges stand on the cusp of a Grand Slam if they can manage a fifth successive victory in this season’s Under-20 Six Nations Championship. Twice previously, in 2007 and 2019, Ireland squads have managed a similar but not the exact same achievement when considering the playing itinerary. In capturing the two previous Grand Slams, Irish teams didn’t have to win in England and France, something that the current group has managed; it’s a small point of difference that offers a separate identity. It’s been a remarkable campaign when considering the competitive start point, a 15-8 defeat to Italy at the Belfield Bowl last December in a pre-tournament warm-up game. Murphy acknowledged: “It is amazing really how far they have come in this window but to think it is the same team, or the nucleus of the same team playing now that played that day, is amazing.” Ireland’s head coach smiled when he recalled an early training session where “in a 15-minute period we had 25 handling errors. When we came off that pitch I was nearly pulling my hair out. In fairness to the guys we stuck on task really well. I know the other coaches are particularly proud of them and we have to acknowledge those other coaches. “Jimmy Duffy is one of the best forward coaches I have ever worked with and I have worked with some really good guys. His attention to detail, his ability to get the group buy-in has been excellent. “Willie [Faloon] has done an incredible job on the defence and then Mark Sexton – obviously I have worked with his brother [Johnny] for a very long time; he has been incredible for us as well and has really picked up little bits and pieces that as a head coach I haven’t been able to look at as much. The boys have really bought into that [coaching team].” The players have shown great character, resilience and togetherness to complement their obvious talent and skills, the best illustration of which is the manner in which they engineered a late Ben Brownlee try to pip France 17-16 in Aix-en-Provence. Murphy has made one alteration to the starting line-up from the victory over England with Aitzol King, who scored two brilliant tries when coming on as a replacement the last day, taking over from Chay Mullins on the right wing, with Mullins dropping to the bench. There is one other change with Malone’s Adam McNamee returning to the matchday 23 in place of James McNabney. Scotland have lost all four matches but relatively speaking it is an experienced group with many of the team having played last year. Head coach Kenny Murray has made one change to the team that lost 27-13 in Italy and struck an upbeat note as he considered Sunday’s game. “It’s been a long campaign for our players who have worked hard throughout. If we convert our chances into points we can end the tournament on a high.” Ireland will be insular in their focus, something that has stood them in good stead to their point. Murphy explained: “That has been the theme in all these games all the way through. We have obviously a lot of respect for our opposition and we will look at those threats closely that are there; but then it is about our execution. “We have challenged the lads to be the best they have been so far and knowing the group and how they have responded to all the other challenges that have been put in front of them, we know they will take that on board and run with it.” If Ireland are properly attuned mentally and physically and adhere to the attacking principles they have demonstrated to date in the tournament, then a sell-out Musgrave Park crowd – Ireland have never lost at the Cork venue – are in for a Sunday evening treat. IRELAND UNDER-20: P Campbell (Young Munster); A King (Clontarf), J Postlethwaite (Banbridge), B Carson (Banbridge), F Gibbons (UCD); C Tector (Lansdowne), M Devine (Galway Corinthians); J Boyle (UCD), J McCormick (Ballymena), R McGuire (UCD); C O’Tighearnaigh (UCD), M Morrissey (UCD); L McLoughlin (QUB), R Crothers (Ballynahinch, capt), J Culhane (UCD). Replacements: J Hanlon (Ballynahinch), O Michel Lansdowne), S Wilson (QUB), A McNamee (Malone), D Mangan (UCD), E Coughlan (Shannon), T Butler (Garryowen), C Mullins (Bristol Bears). SCOTLAND UNDER-20: R McClintock (Montpellier); R McKnight (Glasgow Warriors), D Munn (Glasgow Warriors), A Stirrat (GHA) B Evans (Edinburgh Rugby); C Townsend (Glasgow Warriors), M Redpath (Newcastle University); M Jones (Edinburgh Rugby), P Harrison (Edinburgh Rugby), G Scougall (Currie Chieftains); J Taylor (Ealing Trailfinders), Max Williamson (Glasgow Warriors); M Deehan (Newcastle Falcons); R Tait (Glasgow Warriors, capt), T Brown (Glasgow Hawks). Replacements: D Hood (Bath University), A Rogers (Glasgow Hawks), C Bowker (Fylde), I Hill (Ealing Trailfinders), R Gordon (Exeter University), J Cope (Durham University), T Glendinning (Glasgow Hawks), K Clark (Southern Knights).