Saturday AFL Division Four Tipperary v London Throw-in: 7pm. Venue: FBD Semple Stadium. London’s early surge died out and now they face into Tipp’s late run for the tape, which will see victory promote them. Verdict: Tipperary Cavan v Waterford Throw-in: 6pm. Venue: Kingspan Breffni. Top versus bottom but Cavan’s form has wobbled a bit of late. Still they could even lose and not necessarily fail to go up, which relieves pressure a bit. Verdict: Cavan Carlow v Wexford Throw-in: 1pm. Venue: Netwatch Cullen Park. Two teams with little to play for but Wexford look more likely given Carlow’s status as the leakiest defence in the league. Verdict: Wexford Sunday AFL Division One Donegal v Armagh Throw-in: 1.45pm. Venue: Letterkenny All of the mind games are thrumming away here, given the counties’ championship date in four weeks’ time. The venue comes with its own dismal freight for the home team: 15 years since their last Division One victory here and six straight defeats. More pressingly on a final day when they can still go down for a second time since 2018, Donegal’s form has been mediocre - with only the comeback win over Tyrone getting the blood flowing. Armagh, for a team that was short-listed to drop, have had an encouraging campaign and could still qualify for the final although speculation is that they’d rather not in the circumstances. If Armagh are in any way ambivalent, Donegal can break the Letterkenny curse. Verdict: Donegal Kerry v Tyrone Throw-in: 1.45pm. Venue: Fitzgerald Stadium Another speculative conundrum. Given that it’s a dead rubber, already qualified Kerry can afford to give lots of runs to panellists whereas the All-Ireland champions need a win to spring free of relegation, but is that Jack O’Connor’s way? They have plenty of time before serious championship engagement and an unbeaten run is an ideal springboard to both a league final and what lies beyond. A lively tussle in Armagh tended to emphasise the importance of David Clifford - as of course did last year’s All-Ireland semi-final between the counties. Will he be rested or sprung like last week? It’s not like Kerry or their manager need any motivation. Tyrone improved last week but Mayo were sluggish. If Kerry go for it, they should win. Verdict: Kerry Mayo v Kildare Throw-in: 1.45pm. Venue: Avant Money Páirc Seán MacDiarmada, Carrick-on-Shannon As Lee Keegan remarked during the week, it wouldn’t be polite for Mayo to turn up their noses at silverware so they welcome Kildare to another of their temporary homes with the apparent intention of getting to the final. James Horan’s team selection is further evidence that the county is serious about putting a stop to a run of two defeats. Kildare have had a good campaign, culminating in a good thrashing handed to Monaghan last week. Away form hasn’t been quite as productive however. Verdict: Mayo Monaghan v Dublin Throw-in: 1.45pm. Venue: Clones. On TV: Live on TG4. Monaghan have a fine record against Dublin, who haven’t won this fixture since 2017, which encompasses the last three meetings. Even in the Gavin era, Monaghan troubled Dublin in the league. It might be added that in the same era, the Dubs never went in needing a win to stay afloat in Division One. Dessie Farrell’s team stirred themselves last week and winning here would probably (but not certainly) preserve their status. It’s essentially a relegation playoff. The home side were unlucky at the start of the campaign but have looked very rickety on occasion, the heavy defeats by Kerry and Kildare suggesting that metal fatigue is setting in. They may have one last defiant gambit in mind but chances are, it’s checkmate. Verdict: Dublin AFL Division Two Down v Clare Throw-in: 2pm. Venue: Páirc Esler. Down have been weighed down by a sense of pessimism from the start, which duly played out in their relegation which was confirmed last week. It’s been another fine feat on the part of Colm Collins’s team in preserving their place in Division Two (not absolutely confirmed but they’d to lose traumatically). They’ll instead be hoping to sign off with a win. Verdict: Clare Meath v Derry Throw-in: 2pm. Venue: Páirc Tailteann. After the stress of early season struggle, Meath pulled clear last week - a narrowest of wins over Clare joining an injury-time draw with Offaly, as sources of three points on the board - and are under no pressure here. Derry, however, are and their exposure to the other top teams in the division has been chastening. Hammered by Galway last week - in the absence of Shane McGuigan - and desperately reeling in Roscommon the previous match have left them needing Galway to do them a favour Verdict: Derry Offaly v Cork Throw-in: 2pm. Venue: Bórd na Móna O’Connor Park. The most consequential match in the division - or even the league - will decide who accompanies Down on the relegation journey and in all likelihood into the Tailteann Cup. Both have beaten Down, Cork most recently. Cork’s litany of injury and other departures has led to poor performances whereas Offaly, not without their own difficulties, have out-performed expectations. Huge match. Verdict: Offaly Roscommon v Galway Throw-in: 2pm. Venue: Dr Hyde Park. A dead rubber for the dominant Galway side, whose promotion was sealed a week early. How they approach this match is critical for their opponents - and Derry, who need Roscommon to drop points if they are to reclaim promotion. Given that the counties could be meeting again in the divisional final, much smoke and mirrors can be expected. Bottom line: Roscommon need to win. Verdict: Roscommon AFL Division Three Antrim v Westmeath Throw-in: 2pm. Venue: Corrigan Park. At their best, Westmeath should have sealed promotion. Instead there’s this tricky finale against Antrim, level with them in joint-third. Home advantage gives Enda McGinley’s team an edge against erratic opponents. Verdict: Antrim Laois v Longford Throw-in: 2pm. Venue: MW Hire O’Moore Park. There is a way out for Longford. Win this and they win the head-to-head with their opponents unless Wicklow also win and scoring difference takes over. Suspect it will be academic. Verdict: Laois Limerick v Fermanagh Throw-in: 2pm. Venue: TUS Gaelic Grounds. Big chance for Limerick and entirely in their own hands if they can win this. But for a disputed point, Fermanagh would switch places with Westmeath. They haven’t and will be under pressure here. Verdict: Limerick Wicklow v Louth Throw-in: 2pm. Venue: Aughrim. Wicklow bounced back from the abyss last week to snatch a win but it only confers a notional chance of survival, as they need to close a 30-point differential on Laois. Mickey Harte timed Louth’s run perfectly and they’ll expect to seal promotion here. Verdict: Louth AFL Division Four Sligo v Leitrim Throw-in: 1pm. Venue: Markievicz Park. The counties most affected by any unlikely slip-up from Tipperary on Saturday, Sligo and Leitrim have better scoring difference than any other teams in the division. Sligo have looked more but Leitrim’s Keith Beirne is the league’s top scorer. Verdict: Leitrim