Telcoms company Eir said revenue rose in 2021, with the final quarter of the year in line with expectations. The company reported revenue of €1.24 billion for the year, with adjusted earnings before interest, depreciation and amortisation at €662 million. Eir, which offers phone, broadband, mobile and TV services, said the company increased its total fibre broadband customer base by 4 per cent in the final quarter, and added 9 per cent to it post-pay mobile customers. Eir now has 826,000 fibre broadband customers, and 891,000 mobile customers. Some 82,000 customers pay for TV services with Eir, a 1 per cent rise year on year, with multi-play bundling accounting for 40 per cent of Eir fixed households, up 3 points year on year. Reported revenue increased by 11 per cent in the quarter, with adjusted earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation (Ebidta) up 6 per cent. Additional costs as a result of its acquisition of Evros were offset by continued streamlining of the cost base. Eir acquired Irish IT services provider Evros for €80 million in January 2021, and rebranded Eir Business and Evros as Eir Evo in November. According to its investor report, Eir’s fixed line division contributed 72 per cent of its revenue last year, at €947 million, and adjusted Ebidta was €514 million for the same period. Its mobile division contributed €323 million, with adjusted Ebidta of €148 million. Eir is planning to accelerate its fibre rollout through a joint venture with InfraVia Capital Partners, Fibre Networks Ireland. The partnership will extend the fibre-to-the-home broadband rollout to more than 1.9 million homes and businesses across Ireland, increasing the pace of the rollout by approximately 25 per cent. “Eir’s history has for decades been intrinsically woven into the fabric of Ireland, continuously evolving and transforming with it. We have been consistently bringing forth technological advancements for the benefit of a changing Ireland, ensuring that as a country we remain not just well connected, but competitive on the international stage,” chief executive Oliver Loomes said. “ In my role as CEO, I am looking forward to building on past success and leading eir through the next chapter of its transformation as we move towards an increasingly connected future.” Eir appointed Mr Loomes as chief executive following the news that Carolan Lennon would step down. Mr Loomes took up the role in February.