Commercial property group Hibernia Reit has received a takeover offer that values it at more than €1 billion from Benedict Real Estate Bidco. Bidco is a subsidiary of one of Canadian giant Brookfield Asset Management’s real estate private funds. Brookfield is one of the world’s largest owners and operators of property with more than $250 billion (€227 billion) of property assets globally, and an office portfolio of approximately 200 million square feet worldwide. In Europe, Brookfield’s property business comprises approximately $50 billion of assets across office, student housing, logistics, life sciences, residential, retail and hospitality. Bidco is a newly incorporated Irish company established for the purpose of undertaking the acquisition. Bidco and Hibernia Reit said on Friday they were “pleased to announce” they have reached agreement on the terms of the cash offer by Bidco. The offer has been unanimously recommended by the Hibernia Reit board, pursuant to which Bidco will acquire the entire issued and to be issued share capital of Hibernia Reit. Premium offer Under the terms of the acquisition, Hibernia Reit shareholders would be entitled to receive €1.634 in cash for each Hibernia Reit share. This would be made up of €1.60 per share and a dividend of 3.4 cent per share. The acquisition, including the dividend, values the entire issued and to be issued share capital of Hibernia Reit at about €1.089 billion on a fully diluted basis. The company is currently valued at about €781 million in the market. The offer, excluding the dividend, represents a 35.6 per cent premium to Hibernia Reit’s closing price of €1.180 on Thursday. The acquisition, including the dividend, represents a 33.9 per cent premium to Hibernia Reit’s volume weighted average share price of approximately €1.221 over the three month period ending on Thursday. Brad Hyler, managing partner and head of European real estate at Brookfield, said the group was “excited to partner with” Hibernia Reit. “We have built a strong relationship with Hibernia Reit’s management team and are excited to partner with them in the next phase of the company’s development by combining Brookfield’s global real estate expertise with Hibernia Reit’s established operating platform and portfolio of high-quality standing and development assets in Dublin’s most strategic submarkets,” he said. “We look forward to supporting Hibernia Reit as they continue to create value by capturing demand from top global tenants for modern, sustainable buildings with best-in-class amenities and wellness credentials in prime locations.” Portfolio of assets Hibernia Reit chairman Danny Kitchen said: “Despite significant progress against its strategic objectives and a track record of successfully recycling capital into value accretive opportunities, Hibernia Reit has traded at a persistent discount to its prevailing EPRA NTA per share. “The acquisition recognises the company’s prospects and the quality of its portfolio of assets and delivers an acceleration of the value we expect to be created from completion of Hibernia Reit’s major office development projects. “The acquisition allows Hibernia Reit shareholders to realise the value of their investment in Hibernia Reit in cash at a significant premium to Hibernia Reit’s prevailing share price and a premium to its EPRA NTA per share, when taking account of the directors’ current estimates of expected latent tax and debt breakage costs for Bidco.” The financial terms of the acquisition are final and will not be increased, except that Bidco reserves the right to revise the financial terms of the acquisition if Hibernia Reit receives an alternative proposal. The companies said it is intended that the acquisition will be implemented by means of a High Court sanctioned scheme. The acquisition is conditional on approval by Hibernia Reit shareholders at an extraordinary general meeting. A scheme document with further information for shareholders is expected to be published late in the second quarter.