President Michael D Higgins will call for trade unions to play a key role in any reshaping of the working world in the aftermath of Covid-19 when he addresses delegates at Siptu’s biennial conference in Sligo on Tuesday morning. In a speech that will also touch on the role of unions and their members in addressing issues such as the humanitarian crisis arising from the war in Ukraine, climate change and sectarianism, the President will highlight what he sees as the potential for an ongoing benefit from the sorts of changed work practices widely adopted over the past two years. He will argue unions have a central part to play in negotiating this new normal for workers. “The pandemic has prompted a profound reassessment of how we work, where we work, even why we work, all of which has to come out of negotiation and in the design of which there must be a lead role for trade unions and their membership,” he will say. “Covid-19 has demonstrated the effectiveness of remote working in appropriate circumstances and . . . survey after survey indicates that a blended form of remote and office-based working is the preference for the majority of workers as we emerge from the pandemic,” he will tell the conference. Environmental benefits The President will cite the environmental benefits that can accrue to society as a whole, with much-reduced commuting and the related potential for financial benefits to workers themselves. The financial threat currently posed by rising prices, particularly in relation to fuel, was one of the key elements of Siptu general secretary Joe Cunningham’s speech on the opening day of the conference on Monday. He said current rates of inflation amounted to “a test of social solidarity” but told delegates Siptu would fight for its members, particularly the most vulnerable, with the number of workers already enduring low pay a “social obscenity”. “We need to work together if we are to see out this crisis. But we are making this clear: we will pursue wage claims to assist workers and their families to meet this crisis. We will be particularly mindful of low- and average-income earners as inflation hits them harder.” Mr Cunningham called on the Government to engage with unions on how to address the problems caused by rising inflation “as a matter of urgency”. He suggested the economic lessons learned over the past two years should feed into a reshaped system of social protections, and insisted the union would firmly oppose any attempt to press ahead with the raising of the pension age. There are “political forces” that still favour the measure, he said, but “we will continue to campaign until we bury the unfair and unwanted proposal”.