Vladimir Putin’s war on Ukraine has exposed Ireland’s dependence on imported grain, prompting anxiety about disruption in the food supply chain and escalating prices. With as much as 30 per cent of global grain coming from Ukraine and Russia, the threat to food security is clear with potentially far-reaching implications around the world. As Ukrainians are called up to defend their country, Putin’s invasion has hit tillage in the vast, fertile lands of the Black Sea region. The fields of “Europe’s breadbasket” are no longer the priority for farmers, and ports are shut as millions of people flee the violence. The sowing of grain will be heavily curtailed. In addition, further sanctions against Moscow could threaten its grain exports. The upheaval has propelled the price of future wheat supplies to record levels. This spells trouble for Ireland. The increased reliance on grain imports follows a sharp drop in the amount of farmland used for growing crops since the 1980s. There was a 20 per cent decline after 2008, the year the EU confirmed milk quotas would be scrapped in 2015. That decision led to a surge in dairy activity and land formerly used for tillage went into milk production. Annual dairy exports exceed €5 billion. By contrast, the value of cereal exports in 2021 was €61 million. Some kind of rebalancing now seems inevitable. Ahead of emergency talks on Tuesday, farm leaders greeted Agriculture Minister Charlie McConalogue’s suggestion of a big increase in grain-growing with scepticism. However, the onset of the spring sowing season necessitates speedy decisions and a detailed plan to address practical and financial considerations. Everything possible must be done now – and later – to improve domestic supplies. The Minister noted that EU agriculture commissioner Janusz Wojciechowski has committed to help the agricultural sector, saying market support measures under common market operations would be available. The need seems obvious, even if the time for working out a coordinated European approach is limited.