A Co Kerry pony breeder who was told one of his animals had been sent to a slaughterhouse was shocked to learn he was alive and up for sale nearly 2,000km away in Stockholm, Sweden. Noel Lane, from Brosna, said he was delighted to learn the Connemara pony, named Brosna Cheeky Bobby, was alive, but feels let down by the Irish authorities over what happened. The saga began in 2018 when Mr Lane sent Bobby to a trainer in the midlands to be prepared for an upcoming sale in Clifden, Co Galway. “A while later the guy who took him told me he hadn’t done enough work with Bobby to get him sold, which I could accept,” he said. “I heard no more for weeks and weeks and any time I rang the guy he didn’t answer, so eventually I drove to his yard to find out what was going on. He sat me down to a cup of tea and told me that Bobby was too dangerous to be tamed, that nobody could ride him and that he had broken out and taken off down the road a few times.” Mr Lane said the man told him it would be “in everyone’s best interest” if Bobby was sent to a factory to be disposed of, but that he felt that was his decision to make as the owner. “I had my suspicions at that stage because when I had Bobby he was not like at that at all so I decided I would keep an eye out and see if Bobby turned up at any sales or shows, and in the meantime I asked for proof he had been disposed of but none was forthcoming.” Let down Mr Lane said he contacted the Department of Agriculture but felt let down as the official who initiated an investigation into the matter retired before it was concluded. “The next thing didn’t I google Bobby’s name one day and there he was for sale from a couple near Stockholm,” he added. “A lady and her daughter had bought him from another Swedish woman who had ,in fairness to her, assumed she had purchased him legitimately from Ireland. “Now as Bobby was still alive, a theft had occurred so naturally I reported it to the gardaí. I know that the company who transported him to Sweden provided paperwork to establish who paid them to do so but ultimately when a file was sent to the DPP they decided there wasn’t enough to prosecute...I wouldn’t necessarily agree with that decision.” Mr Lane estimates that he could be “out pocket by maybe 10 grand” as a result of what has happened. “When he was sold Bobby was worth maybe €2,500 but with the show experience he has gained since he would be valued at four times that. I’m glad I found him though because I would always been wondering what had happened him, at least now I know.”