Telecommunications firm Eir has joined the scramble to build apartment schemes in Dublin. Eir has given notice that it is to lodge “fast track” plans in the coming days to An Bord Pleanála for a 111-unit apartment scheme for Sommerville House on the Dundrum Road in Dublin 14. Eir has already completed pre-planning consultation with An Bord Pleanála concerning the scheme and the appeals board concluded that the plans put before the board form the reasonable basis for a strategic housing development (SHD) scheme. The 111-unit scheme put before the appeals board consisted of two courtyard blocks reaching to six storeys in height. The scheme is made up of 57 two-bed units, 49 one-bed units and five studios. The site of the proposed development is located on the eastern side of the Dundrum Road to the north of Dundrum Town Centre. The area is characterised by a mix of commercial units, apartments and other housing of varying heights, scale and design. After Eir formally lodges plans with An Bord Pleanála, the appeals board will make a decision on the application in four months. Permission refused In a separate case, An Bord Pleanála has refused planning permission to Wexford-registered firm MNE Capital Ltd to construct 189 build-to-rent apartments at Canterbury Gate, Old Navan Road, Mulhuddart, Dublin 15. The appeals board refused permission for the SHD scheme after pointing out that the internal road network, surface car-parking spaces and vehicular access to the proposed development were located in a zone considered to be at risk of pluvial flooding from the river Tolka. The appeals board stated the flood mitigation measures were not sufficient to manage flood risk to an acceptable level. The site is located 500m west of Mulhuddart village and 2km northwest of the Blanchardstown shopping centre. The apartments consisted of 63 one-bed apartments and 126 two-bed apartments in four blocks ranging in height from five storeys to 10 storeys. The board inspector in the case, Elaine Power, had recommended that planning permission be refused. Fingal County Council had recommended that planning permission be refused on three grounds.