Students Ross Merriman and Conor White from the Solicitors’ Apprentice Debating Society of Ireland (SADSI) were crowned team champions of the 62nd Irish Times Debate competition at the grand final of the event on Friday evening at University College College (UCC). The individual speaker’s award went to Bevin Armstrong from UCD LawSoc. The runner up team was comprised of Martha McKinney Perry and Aisling Rooney from TCD whilst the runner up individual prize went to Frances Aketch of UCD LawSoc. Speakers were competing at Ireland’s longest running third level debating competition for the Demosthenes Trophy for best team, and the Christina Murphy Memorial Trophy for best individual. The losing finalists should take comfort in joining President Michael D Higgins and former president Mary Robinson in not managing to scoop the ultimate prize. Ireland’s first female tánaiste Mary Harney and former deputy leader of Fianna Fáil and minister Mary Hanafin were also finalists who were pipped at the post when they took part in the debate many years ago. The motion for the debate was that “This House believes that the Covid-19 Pandemic has shown that Ireland is not up to the challenges of the 21st century.” The winning SADSI team of Ross Merriman and Conor White opened the debate by arguing for the motion. Mr Merriman said that the pandemic highlighted our “deeply rooted inability to plan”. He stressed that collective efforts won’t come in to play for the more ordinary problems which await us. “[During Covid] we acted on our solidarity based on a fear that will never exist for the less blatant long term challenges that don’t make people panic. The ones that will be boring. That will require constant trial and error and adaptation over decades. We won’t have national solidarity for the challenges ahead that actually divide us.” Other proposition speakers included Martha McKinney Perry and Aisling Rooney (Independents) of TCD, Bevin Armstrong of UCD LawSoc and Olcan McSparron of QUB. Ms Armstrong, who won the overall individual prize, said that Ireland deals with challenges in an “ah sure look it will be grand” manner. “We would rather put our trust in fate than acknowledge any sort of collective responsibility. It is a collective excuse to do nothing. When you say ‘ah sure look it will be grand’ in response to existential issues you abandon any sort of responsibility. There is no leadership. No foresight. No planning. All things necessary to face the challenges of the 21st century.” Opposition to the motion came from Caoimhin Hammill and Sinziana Stanciu of TCD, Sarah Jones and Owen O’Grady of UCD L&H, Pierce Lyons of SADSI and Frances Aketch of UCD. Speaking against the motion the individual runner up, Frances Aketch, recounted her experience of travelling to Kenya from Dublin in economy as an eight-year-old child only to find out that heads of an Irish charity were in first class. “Using money that was supposed to be given to desperate children on the edge of starvation. Instead it was used to give white Irish people extra leg room.” “Later that day I saw the same volunteers purposely walk past a group of children sniffing glue in a ditch on the side of the road on the way to some kind of conference where they would no doubt talk about the good they were doing for the people of Kenya. I tell you this story not to make you feel bad but to truly highlight the sad truth about our world. People only truly care about themselves. This is a dog eat dog world and if you don’t look after yourself as a person, or indeed as a nation, nobody else will.” Ms Aketch said that Ireland had positioned itself as a global tax haven and as a hub for international pharmaceutical companies. She added that in a “dog eat dog world” Ireland stands strong. The event was hosted by UCC Philosoph with Prof Ursula Kilkelly, Head of Business and Law at UCC serving on the judging panel. The chairperson for the evening was deputy chief medical officer Ronan Glynn and deputy editor of the Irish Times Deirdre Veldon was the head judge on the adjudicating panel. Other judges included Circuit Court Judge Helen Boyle who was a team winner with King’s Inn in 1996 and Rachel Mullally who was an individual winner in 2019. The debate was convened by Ronan Daly. Following the debate Mr Glynn addressed the audience. He said the pandemic was essentially “live-streamed” and that it was challenging for the public to know where to find reliable information. “We needed collective action. We needed solidarity. We needed civic will. Covid was the first pandemic of its kind in an age of social media. There was often masses of contradictory data coming at us day by day. “Yes on the one hand science stood up like never before. Vaccines were developed at a speed beyond anything we had previously envisaged. However, on the other hand the pandemic has accurately been characterised as an existential moment in the use and abuse of knowledge.” Meanwhile, since 1960 the National Parliamentary Debate Association of America has invited the three winners to participate in a three week debating tour of the US. Past winners who have gone on to have distinguished careers include Mr Justice Adrian Harriman, Marian Finucane, Derek Davis, Prof Anthony Clare, Gerry Stembridge and Dara O’Briain.