Restaurateur Jay Bourke is seeking alternative funds to finance a debt write-off deal after an insurance broker from which he was banking on a windfall stopped taking on new business. Simon Carswell has the details. Irish ecommerce businesses that rely on social media to win new customers are seeing less traffic to their sites from the iPhone Facebook app and are paying more to advertise to this audience since Apple’s iOS privacy update last year, a new survey has found. Laura Slattery reports. Ireland is a “tech superpower” and other than the US has the most opportunity to influence the actions of social media platforms in terms of regulation, Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen has said. Charlie Taylor listened to her speech in Trinity College yesterday evening. Employers here intend to embark on their biggest hiring spree in more than 15 years in the second quarter of 2022, new data from recruiter Manpower suggests. Colin Gleeson goes through the data. Ryanair has a lot riding on development of cheaper sustainable aviation fuel, writes Cantillon, with the potential for higher air fares from using this fuel a very real threat to its business model. Cyber threats are expected to have the greatest impact on business growth in the year ahead, with 58 per cent of Irish chief executives “extremely” or “very concerned” about their potential impact, according to a report by PwC. Colin Gleeson reports. In our personal finance feature, Fiona Reddan looks at the options available to you for private health insurance cover, whether you’re a first-time customer or seeking a better deal on your cover. In Q&A, a reader wonders if her husband, who was adopted, can claim a share of his birth mother’s farm. Dominic Coyle offers some guidance. AMC, the world’s largest cinema chain, has added an investment in a gold and silver mining company to its portfolio. This wasn’t meant to be in the script, writes Laura Slattery in her media and marketing column. In Me & My Money, Adam Cree, chief revenue officer at Northern Ireland cloud-based ish business software group, 3EN, likes to think of himself as a savvy spender. Stay up to date with all our business news: sign up to our business news alerts and our Business Today daily email news digest.