Dublin-listed pharmaceutical services company Open Orphan has announced that its subsidiary Hvivo has signed a £5 million (€6 million) human challenge study contract with a European biotechnology company. The contract is to test the company’s intravenous antiviral candidate for respiratory syncytial virus, which is the main cause of childhood lower respiratory infections and is responsible for a significant burden of disease in the elderly and in adults with chronic medical problems. Globally it affects an estimated 50 million people annually, leading to 4 million hospitalisations and up to 75,000 in-hospital deaths in children under the age of five years. There is a lack of understanding and insight into the disease, especially in adult groups, despite its considerable impact on society and its high degree of infectivity. The study is expected to commence this year and will test and assess the efficacy of the group’s antiviral candidate in a cohort of healthy young adult volunteers. In virus challenge studies, healthy volunteers are administered a pathogenic or virulent strain of virus. These challenge agents are then used in controlled human infection studies, an area that Hvivo has focused on since 2001. The contract builds on Open Orphan’s existing relationship with this European biotech, following previous early clinical work completed by the Venn Breda team. The company expects the revenues from the contract to be recognised across 2022 and 2023. The study will be conducted by Hvivo’s medics at its quarantine facilities in London which was recently expanded in a cost-efficient manner from 43 to 62 beds. Healthy volunteers for the study will be recruited through the company’s volunteer recruitment arm, FluCamp. The FluCamp volunteer recruitment capacity was also recently expanded across its screening facilities in London and Manchester. Open Orphan, a European-focused, rare and orphan drug consulting services platform, is the result of executive chairman Cathal Friel reversing his pharma services business of the same name into Dublin-listed drug clinical trials manager Venn Life Sciences.