In a stunning fight in Nottingham’s Motorpoint Arena, Ireland’s Michael Conlan was knocked out in the final round of the WBA ‘regular’ Featherweight Championship by reigning champion Leigh Wood. Conlan received immediate medical attention when, at the end of the battle, he fell through the ropes and out of the ring as Wood delivered the final blow of the night. The 30-year-old from Belfast was taken to hospital, with Matchroom Boxing chief executive Frank Smith tweeting that Conlan was “conscious and stable” on arrival. In the early hours of Sunday, Conlan issued an update on his condition on his Instagram story: “I’m all good, I’m just getting checked up in the hospital. The CT scan is all clear. “Congrats to Leigh Wood, congrats to his team, that was the best shot of the night he got me with at the end. But it is what it is, I’ll be back.” He added on Twitter: “Definitely want a rematch lol.” Conlan was leading on most people’s cards when Wood, who had to finish the bout in the 12th round, did just that as the two boxers emptied themselves in a bruising and compelling contest. The Irish Olympic bronze medallist from London had almost ended the fight in the first round when he put Wood on the canvas before an 11-round battle ensued, which Conlan seemed to be edging before the final end arrived. In the final count, bravery from both boxers made it one of the best fights of the year so far, Conlan coming so close but finally running out of gas with less than three minutes of the final round remaining. The referee immediately waved the fight to an end as Conlan was attended to by doctors. Both fighters had cuts, Conlan on his left eye and Wood two, one above his nose and on his left eye. But it came down to the last man standing, Woods showing his heart and stamina from the early knockdown to putting the former amateur world champion down in the 11th and finishing the fight in the next round. It will be a case of so close but yet so far for the Belfast featherweight, the important issue at hand that he now makes a full recovery from what was a brutal and riveting contest. In the ring just before Conlan, middleweight Caoimhín Agyarko added another victory to his unblemished 11-0 record with a valuable win over Mexican Juan Carlos Rubio. Agyarko won by unanimous decision over the 10 rounds, dominating the centre of the ring from the first to last. Rubio, an awkward southpaw, frustrated the Holy Trinity fighter in the early rounds but was always backing away from the menacing 25-year-old, who is fast building a reputation as a dangerous opponent. It was Agyarko’s first defence of the international middleweight belt he won just before Christmas last year. – Additional reporting: PA