Genesis, a highly-regarded company that has built a dedicated application development platform for financial markets, is to create at least 40 jobs in Dublin over the next 18 to 24 months. Speaking to The Irish Times, chief financial officer Billy Morris said there is the potential for many more roles to come on stream in the coming years locally. Genesis, which last month raised $200 million (€184 million) in funding in a round led by Tiger Global Management, appointed Mr Morris to establish operations in Dublin last year. The Dubliner formally led scaling efforts at a number of high-growth tech companies, including Thousand Eyes (part of Cisco), and Twilio. He is charged with establishing Dublin as the company’s European service hub with a number of functions to be based here, including sales, accounting, finance and data and analytics. The company currently employs 10 people here. Mr Morris said that as well as roles in business operations, he is also keen to build out the technical engineering team locally. With Genesis, firms can build software significantly faster than if they had started from scratch, with less code and at a lower cost. Founded by Stephen Murphy in London in 2015, the low-code/no-code application development platform is used by banks, asset managers, fund administrators and stock exchanges to build new applications that can work with existing legacy systems. Its customers include Citi, which has also backed the company, ING, London Clearing House and asset managers Alliance Bernstein and WallaceBeth. Mr Morris said Genesis’s focus on financial markets makes the company unique. “We provide a lot of value, especially to those large complex businesses who may be dependent on legacy providers. We can help such customers continue to innovate quickly via our platform,” he said. Genesis, whose other backers include Accel, GV (Google Ventures), Illuminate Financial, Insight Partners, Salesforce Ventures and Tribeca Early Stage Partners, has reported rapid growth in recent years. The company recently surpassed 200 employees globally. “We’re seeing strong traction and are impressed with the top-tier talent here. I expect that as we continue to grow our business, that headcount will also continue to rise,” he said.