Whether entertaining at home or looking to soak up activities in the community, what better way to embrace Ireland’s cultural heritage than by cooking a tasty recipe with our nation’s favourite – the potato. And the best bit? Mealtime inspiration is just a few clicks away at potato.ie where there are over 200 quick, tasty and healthy recipes suitable for brunch, lunch and dinner. Potatoes: A nutritional powerhouse Potatoes are naturally fat and gluten free and have a whole host of nutritional benefits. Potatoes are a good source of dietary fibre, Vitamins B and C, and contain the mineral potassium which regulates heart function, muscle contraction, and water balance in the body. You can cut down on prep-time and boost fibre intake by eating potatoes with the skin on. For greater convenience, cutting potatoes into smaller  pieces allows them to be cooked quicker. In honour of St Patrick’s Day, here are a trio of potato recipes from potato.ie that add a modern twist to traditional Irish cuisine. Enjoy with friends and family over the long weekend. St Patrick’s Day fish pie potato skins Try this delicious take on a fish pie – creating perfect finger food for sharing while watching TV Preparation time: 20 minutes Cooking time: 75 minutes Serves four Ingredients Method St Patrick’s Day potato, bacon and cabbage bake Try this delicious twist on the traditional bacon and cabbage for an indulgent one-dish dinner. This is a great way to use up leftover ingredients too. Cooking time: 35 minutes Serves four Ingredients Method St Patrick’s Day Irish beef and potato stew Simple to prepare, tasty and comforting – Irish stews are a tried and trusted crowd-pleaser. Make ahead of time and serve piping hot in bowls – the perfect way to warm up after attending a parade. Cooking time: 180 minutes Serves four Ingredients Method ‘Potatoes, Prepare to be Surprised’ is an EU campaign that aims to encourage millennials enjoyment of exciting and surprising potato recipes. The joint initiative,  organised by Bord Bia, CNIPT (France), VLAM (Belgium), and Europatat (the European Potato Trade Association) highlights the versatility and convenience of potatoes for busy lifestyles.