The couple who bought this detached house in a quiet cul-de-sac in Carrickmines off plans in 1999 had two small sons when they moved in in 2000. Twenty-two years later, their youngest child is 18 and they’ve decided it’s time to move on. Over the years they have upgraded the Park Developments home in the upscale Carrickmines Wood scheme: now 7 Carrickmines Garth, a 223sq m (2,400 sq ft) five-bed is for sale through Sherry FitzGerald for €1.325 million. It has a BER rating of B3. From the double-height marble-floored entrance hall to the L-shaped stone-floored kitchen, the house is in walk-in condition: the owners have fitted it out over the years with high-quality furniture that includes Kelco-designed wardrobe/shelving/desk units in bedrooms, a smart utility room with oak units that include a pullout drawer concealing a laundry basket, with a hanging area above it, and fully tiled bathrooms with wall-hung toilets that conceal cisterns and pipework. Walls are painted Dulux Heritage white. The carpeted drawing room to the right of the front hall has a limestone fireplace and a box bay window overlooking the front garden; double glass doors open into a bright, oak-floored study, originally a dining room, with fitted shelving and more double glass doors opening to the back garden. The SieMatic kitchen at the back of the house is a bright, L-shaped space, floored with Travertine stone tiles. Units are white and the countertops and island are topped with polished brown granite. There’s a smart downstairs toilet off the front hall, and a family room – converted from the garage – with an oak floor and painted Kelco timber units with shelving and cupboards. It opens through the utility room into the kitchen. Upstairs, four of the five bedrooms are doubles and two are en suite. The main bedroom has a wall of wardrobes, full-length plantation shutters on tall windows that open to a narrow balcony. The fully tiled en suite has a large shower. There are separate patio and decking areas beside the lawn in the wide back garden, which is bordered by plants and bushes next to tall fencing; it also has outdoor lighting and surround sound. There’s parking for two cars in the gravelled front garden and space for guest parking in the cul-de-sac. A path near Carrickmines Garth leads directly in to Cabinteely Park, a strong attraction in this neighbourhood. Carrickmines Luas stop is 650m away.