Saturday DIVISION ONE Tyrone v Mayo, O’Neill’s Healy Park, 5.45 – Live, RTÉ 2  Mayo have dialled down the relevance of this rerun of last year’s All-Ireland decider by naming a fairly experimental team. Aidan O’Shea, after a decent outing under more conventional deployment in Tralee, is named at centre back – whether that’s a plan or a last look before he becomes a bench option. David McBrien returns after 18 months out. Tyrone were poor against Dublin, well beaten in the middle and slack in defence. They won’t want to be in relegation territory for last match and might be able to resist. Verdict: Tyrone DIVISION THREE Laois v Limerick, MW Hire O’Moore Park, 7.0 No sooner had Limerick got Brian Fanning back than they ran into a restored Westmeath and the worrying tendency to fade in the second half undermined them. Laois are still in the hunt. Verdict: Laois Sunday DIVISION ONE Armagh v Kerry, Athletic Grounds, 2.0 – Live, TG4 app (deferred coverage on TG4 from 5.35) A chance for Armagh to reclaim a chance of reaching the final. Kerry have been ultra-competitive in their matches to date and this is a tough assignment. Jack O’Connor will be keen to get a look at Joe O’Connor in the middle after injury whereas Armagh’s forwards will be a solid test of the visitors’ new-found sense of defensive purpose. A win sends Kerry to the final. Verdict: Kerry Kildare v Monaghan, Newbridge, 2.45 Monaghan have this year’s big move already up and running after inflicting a rare defeat on Donegal in Ballyshannon. Séamus McEnaney has also looked at a few new players. They’re so practised in these situations whereas Kildare for all that they have held their own and their full backs have been excellent, concede a lot of possession in the middle third. Monaghan have also leaked goals but can manage games efficiently, as when holding on to an early lead last week.Verdict: Monaghan Dublin v Donegal, Croke Park, 3.45 – Live TG4 Dublin’s belated return to winning in Omagh featured many heartening reversals of fortune: David Byrne’s man-of-the-match after a few horror outings of being left exposed in a chaotic defence, Brian Fenton’s commanding display in the middle, Cormac Costello re-energising the attack and James McCarthy’s reappearance. Donegal never regained control of Monaghan last week and have a poor league record in this fixture, not having won it in 15 years – not that Croke Park doesn’t suit them but they need to raise their game to have a chance. Verdict: Dublin DIVISION TWO Cork v Down, Páirc Uí Chaoimh, 1.0 This is an actual relegation eliminator. Cork lost another defender, Seán Meehan, possibly for the rest of the season, and Keith Ricken’s options are shrinking all the time. They must get points here and Down’s flatlining may assist. Verdict: Cork Derry v Galway, Owenbeg, 1.0  The division’s leading teams face off but potentially minus their star forwards, as injury hovers over Shane Walsh and Shane McGuigan currently stands suspended, pending a challenge. Depending on how those issues are resolved, Derry look better structured and were able to strategise a way out of trouble last week whereas Galway have bee fitful. Verdict: Derry Clare v Meath, Cusack Park, Ennis, 2.0  The mid-table teams could do each other a favour with a draw, which would put both of them almost certainly beyond the clutches of two teams. Meath are picking up greater momentum. Verdict: Meath Offaly v Roscommon, Bórd na Mona O’Connor Park, 2.0  The win in Newry was a terrific result for Offaly and gives them a fighting chance of survival. Roscommon have been quite impressive so far and will need to get something out of this given the two draws to date. Verdict: Roscommon DIVISION THREE Longford v Wicklow, Glennon Brothers Pearse Park, 2.0 The bottom two meet and it’s likely that Wicklow will be formally consigned to the drop given the home side’s capacity to find a performance. Verdict: Longford Louth v Antrim, Ardee, 2.0  Mickey Harte has got Louth on a roll and they welcome their chief rivals and fellow table toppers Antrim. Promotion isn’t definitely on offer here given the tight pile-up in the division but Louth can take a big step. Verdict: Louth Westmeath v Fermanagh, TEG Cusack Park, 2.0 After a couple of indifferent results, Westmeath got back on track a great second-half display from Luke Loughlin and the ever-reliable John Heslin got them home. Fermanagh are out of the promotion picture. Verdict: Westmeath DIVISION FOUR London v Cavan, Ruislip, 12.0 Early pace-setters welcome favourites, who slipped up last week but unlikely to here. Verdict: Cavan Waterford v Sligo, Fraher Field, Dungarvan, 2.0  Bottom side Waterford won’t be able to curb high-scoring Sligo. Verdict: Sligo Leitrim v Wexford, Avant Money Páirc Seán MacDiarmada, 2.30  Leitrim can sign off on a positive note. Verdict: Leitrim Tipperary v Carlow, FBD Semple Stadium, 3.45 Tipp miraculously restored their promotion prospects and will copperfasten them in this. Verdict: Tipperary