Building materials giant CRH, one of Ireland’s biggest companies, has decided to exit the Russian market, following the invasion of Ukraine and the imposition of economic sanctions on Russia. Responding to questions from The Irish Times last night, ahead of the publication of its annual results this morning, the company said it had decided to cease operations in Russia over the weekend. Mark Paul has the story. A quicker-than-expected rebound in consumer spending and employment have boosted Government tax receipts and helped repair the Covid-depleted public finances. The Government generated a surprise budget surplus of nearly ¤1 billion in February, according to the latest exchequer figures published last night. Eoin Burke-Kennedy has the details. However, the Family Business Network has claimed that the Irish tax system is “unfairly stacked” against family businesses, in a submission to the recently established Commission on Taxation and Welfare. Eoin also has that story. Dún Laoghaire-Rathdown County Council has rejected Iput plc’s €250 million plan for its latest phase of The Park mixed-use scheme for Carrickmines in south Dublin. Gordon Deegan reports. Any attempt to tax homeowners generating solar electricity on their roof could lead to people thinking it was “not worth the trouble”, Department of Finance officials have cautioned in a submission to Minister for Finance Paschal Donohoe, released to Ken Foxe following a Freedom of Information request. Staying with renewable energy, ReVolve Renewable Power, an Irish company developing wind and solar projects in the US and Mexico, is on track to start trading on Toronto next week, after it completes a merger with a Canadian-listed company. Joe Brennan has the story. Parents and carers in the Irish screen industry face cultural bias and “very clear barriers” that disproportionately affect women and can force them to leave the industry, a report by advocacy and support organisation Raising Films Ireland has found. Laura Slattery attended a sold-out event held as part of the Virgin Media Dublin International Film Festival yesterday, which heard parents and carers often contend with limited career opportunities, inflexible working arrangements and, on occasion, outright discrimination. We can’t stop the march of technology into our children’s lives, but how can we introduce it safely and in an age-appropriate manner to our children? Ciara O’Brien investigates the products and services available to assist parents. In her Net Results column this week, Karlin Lillington explores how the decision by the Data Protection Commission to order Facebook parent company Meta to halt data transfers to the US could lead to a decisive victory for data privacy. And finally, from zero-emissions regulations to the rules governing self-driving cars, the auto industry is facing a multifronted regulatory onslaught. Peter Campbell reports.