The announcement further strengthens the depth of expertise in the firm's Corporate, Dispute Resolution & Insolvency and Finance practice areas. The newly elected partners are Eugene McCormick, Karole Cuddihy and Morgan Pierse, along with of counsels, Nichola O'Reilly and William Darmody. With almost 500 people employed in Ireland, the Maples Group has grown significantly in the past few years, evolving its legal services offering to become a full service law firm and adding a variety of specialised practices, such as employment, data commercial and technology and financial services regulation to further support its international clients. The latest appointments elevate the firm's partnership to an all-time high with the percentage of female lawyers at senior level also rising to 41 per cent in Ireland. In addition to the newly appointed partner and of counsel, and in line with its commitment to nurturing and growing a strong talent pipeline for the future, the Irish firm recently congratulated 10 of its trainees on their admission as solicitors in Ireland. Aileen McCormack, Edwina Hilton, Fiachra MacElhatton, Hilary Heelan, Krzysztof Podkonski, Lauren McGarry, Niamh Harford, Niamh Maguire, Peter Dunlea and Síofra McNamee completed their traineeships with the firm and were also promoted to associates in its Finance, Funds & Investment Management, Tax and Structured Finance practices. Speaking on the appointments, Ireland managing partner, Peter Stapleton says; "These senior promotions, along with our new associates, showcase our continued growth and further cement Maples and Calder (Ireland) LLP as Ireland's largest and most successful international law firm. Our growing Irish operations are now a significant part of our wider Group which comprises nearly 2,500 people, including over 75 nationalities in 16 offices worldwide. Over the past few years we have continued to expand and broaden our expertise as we work with clients in an increasingly complex global environment. Our new partners and of counsel join their global colleagues in building on our collective success by continuing to provide world-class legal and financial services solutions to clients while also demonstrating both the growth and career development opportunities across the Group. Each of these promotions reflect the strong levels of activity that we anticipate for both our domestic and international clients. They also showcase our wide breadth of expertise in all practice areas." These appointments are effective immediately and form part of the international law firm's annual promotions. Seventeen new partners and of counsel were appointed across the firm's market-leading practice areas in seven locations, with a strong representation in particular across Europe, where nine lawyers were promoted to partner and of counsel positions. Across the firm's practices, globally, Dispute Resolution & Insolvency and Funds & Investment Management saw the largest intake of new partners and of counsel, followed closely by Corporate, Finance, and Financial Services Regulation. In total, there were two promotions in Asia, nine promotions in Europe and six in the Caribbean region. About the new partners Karole Cuddihy Karole Cuddihy specialises in corporate insolvency and restructuring. His work includes advising on liquidations, receiverships and examinerships, including acting for insolvency professionals, creditors, directors, shareholders and potential investors. He also has significant experience in advocacy before the Irish courts. Eugene McCormick Eugene McCormick specialises in commercial litigation and dispute resolution across a variety of areas including financial services, landlord and tenant, and professional negligence. He has extensive experience conducting large scale and complex litigation, including multi-jurisdictional disputes. Morgan Pierse Morgan Pierse specialises in corporate law and has a broad corporate and commercial practice including advising Irish and international clients on domestic and cross-border mergers and acquisitions, venture capital and private equity transactions, joint ventures, loan portfolio transactions and corporate reorganisations. He has significant transactional experience and expertise across the financial services and technology sectors. About the new of counsel William Darmody William Darmody advises on a wide range of corporate transactions. He has been involved in many of Ireland's most significant equity financings and M&A transactions in recent years and has experience across a range of sectors, with a particular focus on technology, life sciences and aviation. He has built a strong reputation in the market due to his commercial understanding of clients' needs and his solution driven approach. Nichola O'Reilly  Nichola O'Reilly has experience across a broad range of debt capital markets and structured finance transactions. Her experience includes advising on real estate debt securitisations, convertible and high yield bond offerings as well as the work out of legacy CMBS transactions and cross border debt portfolio disposals and associated financing covering various jurisdictions across Europe, including UK, Ireland, Germany, France, Spain and Italy. For more information visit maples.com