What would make your list of must-see and must-do things in Dublin? Would you tell a complete stranger to go to the Gravediggers or Grogan’s, Grano or Guilbaud’s, or the Dead Zoo or the live one? Would you bring them so see the bones of St Valentine or the ghosts in Kilmainham Gaol? Would Temple Bar feature on your list, or would you direct them straight to Camden Street instead? If you think you know all of Dublin’s gems - the hidden ones and those that sparkle like the Spire light - then an as yet unbuilt concept hotel might be able to make use of you. citizenM - a hotel so cool it puts the capital letter in its name in completely the wrong place - has acquired a property on Bride Street in Dublin 8, and is promising to bring something new to an area already bursting at the seams with achingly hip hotels. The hotel group, which has 16 properties in cities including London, Amsterdam, Paris, New York, San Francisco, Taipei and Kuala Lumpur, says that when it opens in Dublin 2024 it will “focus on the promotion of local art and culture” and will collaborate with a local artist to make that happen. “Every citizenM hotel opening includes a collaboration with a local artist; to date the brand has commissioned over 120 pieces of art and incorporated over 275 exhibited artworks globally. This property will be no exception and will feature an art installation on the main facade, which will be announced in due course,” the hotel says. The hotel will “strive to become part of the fabric of the city and believes that this can’t be achieved without the unique insights of locals who love the cities they live in”. This is where you might come in. It has brought in a “Culture Scout” programme “which will help shape the stories around the new hotels and share them with the world”. This week it starts its hunt for a Dublin-based culture scout to join others in Austin Texas and Rome. “citizenM is looking for people who love to go off the beaten path to find local gems; a resident of Dublin who knows the best bars, cafes and restaurants; with great insider knowledge of the art and cultural scene; a storyteller and natural networker who loves to travel and connects with citizenM’s ethos and values.” The hotel says that with the help of the scout will “create a space that feels authentic to the host city’s present day vibrant character”. And what will you get if you are the chosen one? The hotel chain is offering a one-off payment of €3,000 plus the promise of free citizenM accommodation around the world. Construction of the 245 room hotel on Bride Street, opposite St Patrick’s Cathedral, will start in August. The hotel will promise travellers “luxury accommodation at affordable prices… Offering a minimal-fuss contactless experience, guests can check in remotely, and then use their phone to open their room, order food and beverages, control the in-room experience, then check-out when they’ve finished their stay.” “Dublin has been high on our list of target cities for some time, and we are thrilled to have secured this location as our first entry into the Irish market,” said cirizenM’s chief executive Klaas Van Lookeren Campagne. “While the past year has been a challenge for the whole industry, we are confident and continue with our ambitious growth strategy both in Europe and the US, which includes actively seeking additional locations in Dublin. We believe our affordable luxury concept is a great fit for the city, appealing to both visitors and locals alike, and look forward to connecting with this vibrant community.” Anyone with an interest in becoming a citizen culture scout can apply at citizenm.com/culturescout before May 15th.