Peter O’Mahony and Joey Carbery have been ruled out of Munster’s Champions Cup last-16 first leg against Exeter through injury. Both played in last week’s defeat to Leinster but a hamstring issue has sidelined O’Mahony while a knee problem has done for Carbery. Gavin Coombes also misses out after being ruled out earlier in the week due to an ankle injury sustained when being cleared out of a ruck against Leinster. Jack O’Donoghue captains the side for the first time in a European game in O’Mahony’s absence, while Alex Kendellen gets his first Champions Cup start, lining out at number eight. Ben Healy replaces Carbery at outhalf. Eight changes in total are made to the starting XV that went down to Leinster, as Mike Haley, Keith Earls and Simon Zebo come into a revamped backthree, while in the engine room Jean Kleyn replaces Jason Jenkins. Thomas Ahern is in line to make his European bow off the bench. Meanwhile Ulster too have named their side for Saturday’s daunting trip to Toulouse. Dan McFarland has recalled John Cooney, Stuart McCloskey and Robert Baloucoune to the backline that lost to the Bulls last time out. Up front, Eric O’Sullivan starts at loosehead ahead of Andrew Warwick while Rob Herring also returns to the starting XV to complete the frontrow alongsieMarty Moore. Alan O’Connor starts at secondrow ahead of Ireland squad member Kieran Treadwell - who drops to the bench. Iain Henderson partners him and captains the side. Marcus Rea replaces Jordi Murphy in the backrow as Duane Vermeulen and Nick Timoney keep their places. Opponents Toulouse come pretty much locked and loaded into Saturday’s clash with Antoine Dupont and Romain Ntamack starting in the halfbacks. France regulars Peato Mauvaka and Francois Cros also start, though prop Cyril Baille and Anthony Jelonch only make the bench. Exeter Chiefs: Stuart Hogg; Olly Woodburn, Henry Slade, Ian Whitten, Tom O’Flaherty; Joe Simmonds, Sam Maunder; Alec Hepburn, Jack Yeandle (capt) Harry Williams; Jonny Gray, Sam Skinner; Dave Ewers, Jacques Vermeulen, Sam Simmonds. Replacements: Jack Innard, Ben Moon, Patrick Schickerling, Jannes Kirsten, Richard Capstick, Jack Maunder, Harvey Skinner, Josh Hodge. Munster:  Mike Haley; Keith Earls, Chris Farrell, Damian de Allende, Simon Zebo; Ben Healy, Conor Murray; Jeremy Loughman, Niall Scannell, Stephen Archer; Jean Kleyn, Fineen Wycherley; Jack O’Donoghue (C), John Hodnett, Alex Kendellen. Replacements: Diarmuid Barron, Josh Wycherley, John Ryan, Jason Jenkins, Thomas Ahern, Craig Casey, Rory Scannell, Jack O’Sullivan. Toulouse: Thomas Ramos; Juan Cruz Mallia, Zack Holmes, Pita Ahki, Matthis Lebel; Romain Ntamack, Antoine Dupont; Rodrigue Neti, Peato Mauvaka, Dorian Aldegheri; Rory Arnold, Emmanuel Meafou; Rynhardt Elstadt, Thibaud Flament, Francois Cros. Replacements: Guillaume Cramont, Cyril Baille, Richie Arnold, Anthony Jelonch, Alban Placines, Martin Page Relo, Sofiane Guitoune. Ulster: Mike Lowry; Robert Baloucoune, James Hume, Stuart McCloskey, Ben Moxham; Billy Burns, John Cooney; Eric O’Sullivan, Rob Herring, Marty Moore; Alan O’Connor, Iain Henderson (capt); Marcus Rea, Nick Timoney, Duane Vermeulen. Replacements: Bradley Roberts, Andrew Warwick, Tom O’Toole, Kieran Treadwell, Jordi Murphy, Nathan Doak, Luke Marshall, Rob Lyttle.