Irish co-founded tech company Sonrai Security is expanding its footprint, opening its first European office in London. The move comes following a $50 million (€47.7 million) Series C funding round last year. The cybersecurity company is also targeting further expansion later in the year with the opening of its office in Singapore. Sonrai, which means “data” in Irish, helps large corporations track, organise and protect data that is stored in the cloud. The company plans to capitalise on its growth in 2022 and bring its cloud security platform, which unearths, prioritises and removes risks across every part of a customer’s public cloud, to more enterprises globally. “Organisations understand the importance of securing the cloud using cloud-native technologies and not old-school approaches and first-generation cloud security posture management (CSPM) tools have left many companies unprotected against escalating cyberthreats,” said Brendan Hannigan, co-founder and chief executive of Sonrai Security. “We are expanding our footprint internationally to serve growing demand from customers in Europe and Asia.” The London office is under the direction of Sonrai’s head of its EMEA business, Danny Adamson, and will lead to more jobs at the company. “The future of technology is in the cloud,” said Mr Adamson. “Companies have a huge opportunity for a security redo in the cloud to better protect their data from the continuous cyberattacks plaguing businesses today. I’m excited to lead Sonrai’s efforts in Europe as more companies recognize the need to rethink how they secure cloud data and with our new expanded platform, Sonrai is delivering the right solution at the right time and place.” Sonrai Dig uniquely enables enterprises to see everything - including inventory, activity, identities, data and workloads - and to map every possible access path to data in their clouds. By linking workload vulnerabilities into Sonrai’s Identity Graph, the most critical risks are rapidly identified, prioritized and remediated. Headquartered in New York, Sonrai was founded by Dubliner Brendan Hannigan and his business partner Sandy Bird in 2017, but operated in stealth mode until going public in January 2019.Among its backers are Menlo Ventures and Polaris Partners.