The people of Northern Ireland want a new Stormont Executive to be formed quickly after next week’s elections and it is “vital” this happens, Taoiseach Micheál Martin has said. Mr Martin also said issues around Brexit have “hindered” the Northern Ireland peace process. He made the remarks during an appearance at the Oireachtas Committee on the Implementation of the Good Friday Agreement to discuss his Government’s Shared Island initiative. There is concern at how soon a new Northern Ireland Executive can be formed after next Thursday’s Assembly elections. Tensions remain ongoing between Dublin and London over the Northern Ireland Protocol which was agreed to govern post-Brexit trade in a way that avoids a hard border in Ireland. DUP leader Jeffrey Donaldson has said his party will not return to the Executive unless the issues around the Protocol are resolved to the party’s satisfaction. He has refused to confirm whether his party will take up the deputy first minister role alongside a Sinn Féin first minister if, as expected, that party wins the most seats. Mr Martin said: “It is vital for the future of Northern Ireland and for relationships on these islands that the political parties take their mandates from the Assembly elections and move quickly to form a new Executive. That is what the people of Northern Ireland want.” Political leaders He said it is a moment for political leaders to live up to the commitments of the Belfast Agreement which he pointed out is “overwhelmingly supported by people across this island.” Mr Martin also said “political leadership - by all with a role and responsibility - is also fundamental, in getting beyond the issues around Brexit and the Protocol that have hindered the Peace Process over the last six years. “We need to return the focus to working collectively to support progress and prosperity for all in Northern Ireland and across this island.” Mr Martin said these are among the Government’s objectives and responsibilities as a co-guarantor of the Belfast Agreement. He added: “We are significantly prioritising, resourcing and delivering an ambitious, practical agenda to support that through our Shared Island initiative.” The programme of cross-border investment and dialogue has funding of €3.5 billion up to 2030 under the National Development Plan. Over the last year more than 1,300 citizens and civic leaders have participated across nine Shared Island Dialogue events. Sinn Féin MP Michelle Gildernew commended the Taoiseach on the initiative saying it was making a “valuable and very positive contribution”. She said her party has areas of concern that the Shared Island Unit could “explore and provide leadership on” including the setting of a date to hold “a constitutional referendum on this country’s independence”. Framework Mr Martin rejected this suggestion saying that the holding of such a referendum was a matter covered by the framework of the Belfast Agreement. He said staying out of the issue gives the Shared Island initiative the capacity to engage with all communities. Mr Martin said: “That’s the challenge to build trust that people can participate in Shared Island without the sense that it is a Trojan Horse for something else. “That is a concern in Unionism let’s be frank about it. That would be a concern that they have. But so far no barriers have been put up to it.” Earlier the committee heard of difficulty engaging with Unionist parties on such initiatives but Mr Martin said “civic Unionism” has been involved in Shared Island dialogue events. Mr Martin said Shared island investment plans include increased collaboration between higher education institutions in the North-West and new cross-border greenways, and our transport connectivity commitments, including the Government’s contribution to the A5 upgrade. “The Shared Island Fund means that we have the resourcing ready to go for all of these major projects,” Mr Martin said. He said the Irish Government and Northern Ireland Executive have also started an all-island strategic rail review, to be completed later this year, including a focus on better connections for the North-West. Mr Martin said: “Informed by the outcome of this review, we will make new strategic investments in sustainable rail, working with the Executive and the UK Government.”