Aidan Moffitt (41) lived life to the full, always putting family and friends first, while Michael Snee (58) would be remembered as a “lovely, gentle, sensitive, caring, compassionate” man, their funerals heard on Monday. Both men died violently in their homes in Sligo last week. A man has been charged with in relation to their deaths. Their funerals took place simultaneously - Mr Moffit’s at his native Lisnacul, Co Roscommon and Mr Snee’s in his native Sligo. Fr Michael McManus told mourners at the church of Christ the King, Lisnacul he had been “in a state of shock, like the rest of the country” when told of Aidan’s death. “Words fail at this time and yet all we have are words to show sorrow and support.” Mourners heard of Aidan’s love of Roscommon GAA, his passion for horse racing and his joy when Ashjan, a horse he co-owned, won at Downpatrick in 2017, and his professional successes. Martin McMahon, a friend of Aidan’s, said the word that shone through in any reciting of his life was “kindness” which was most evident in his devotion to his mother Kathleen and his family. Mr McMahon recalled his friend’s interest in politics and his desire to make people’s lives better and his admiration for Michael Collins. “How poignant is it that the two big fellows died 100 years apart,” commented his friend as he pointed that a commemorative pen marking the 100th anniversary of Michael Collins death was “proudly attached to his lapel as we bid him farewell today”. Fr McManus appealed to those who mourn Mr Moffitt “not let the manner of his death be the lasting memory of Aidan. Aidan the character lived his Iife to the full always putting his family and friends before his own needs”. He said that while successful in many fields Aidan “he was first and foremost a son brother, uncle and friend”. At the Church of St Joseph, Ballytivnan, Sligo, Michael Snee’s nephew Aaron Spring, said it would be the “simple things” that those who loved him would miss. “He loved his garden, he loved his fashion... Michael loved to cook and the day that he was taken from us he had cooked a beautiful meal for grandad and myself. This was something he had regularly done and always done so well. ‘Huge community of friends’ “Michael was a people person – loved a bit of craic and having a laugh, He was always able to tell a good story. He had a huge community of friends which have shared their shock and sadness with us at the vigils. “For each of his family we are all going to miss Michael in our own special way and the way Michael showed his cared. For grandad John, he is going to miss the gardening tips and the delicious home-cooked meals. For my mum Mary, the support Michael gave her every day through her battle with cancer. For his sister Tina, sneaking into town for lunch.” “For myself, Michael was the only person who shortened my name… and called me ‘A’... It’s the simple things like Michael coming into the house ‘Here, A, Make us a coffee’. We love you Mike. We’re all going to miss you.” Welcoming mourners, Fr Noel Rooney extended particular “love and affection” to Michael’s father, John, “who in his own 90th year has to face this enormous grief and sadness”. Fr Rooney said: “There is much sadness in this church this afternoon. There is much grief…there is much devastation. But there is also much anger and there is nothing wrong with that anger.” These emotions were brought to the funeral “in solidarity with the family of Aidan Moffit. Fr Rooney said mourners must “not allow the horror of [MICHAEL’S]death to define his beautiful life”. “What a beautiful life Michael Snee did live, what a kind life, He was the quintessential gentle person.” Referring to his work with adults with intellectual disabilities, Fr Rooney said many had described “his beautiful, gentle skill in dealing with the most complex of situations and the most complex of people. This was Michael - the lovely, gentle, sensitive, caring, compassionate person that he was.” Bishop of Elphin, Kevin Doran, sent letters of condolences to the Snee and Moffit families, which were read at their funerals. The Taoiseach Micheál Martin was represented at the funerals by his aide de camps. Among the mourners at Mr Snee’s funeral was the Mayor of Sligo, councillor Arthur Gibbons.