An Bord Pleanála has granted planning permission for a new €316 million build-to-rent apartment scheme for Dundrum in Dublin. The 531-unit scheme at Marmalade Lane, Wyckham Avenue, Dundrum, Dublin 16 is comprised of 28 studios, 297 one-bed units, 197 two-bed units and nine three-bed units. The 1 Wyckham Land Ltd development includes a 10-storey apartment block. Amenities for residents include an outdoor cinema, a yoga studio, a chef’s kitchen, a rooftop garden allotment and pet washing facilities. The appeals board has granted planning permission for the five-block scheme despite Dun Laoghaire Rathdown County Council recommending a refusal on five separate grounds. The board ruled that due to its location and scale, the scheme is critical and integral to the success of national policy in addressing both housing and homelessness in the city and consolidating the urban environment. It found that the site is located close to high-frequency and high-capacity public transport, educational and employment hubs and a range of services and facilities within Dundrum. The board also found that the scheme is acceptable in terms of urban design, height and quantum of development. Over-provision Board inspector in the case, Elaine Power concluded that the scheme would not contribute to the over-provision of build-to-rent apartment schemes for Dublin. In response to the council recommendation to refuse planning permission over the proposed height of the scheme, Ms Power concluded that the proposed separation distances achieve a balance of protecting the residential amenities of existing residents from undue overlooking, overshadowing and overbearing impact. The council also recommended a refusal across built heritage, car-parking, visual amenity and connectivity headings. However, Ms Power recommended a grant of permission across all those headings. She found that the proposed height would not significantly detract from the visual amenities of the area and also found that the scheme provides sufficient car-parking. More than 80 parties objected to the fast-track plans.