Silver Birch’s victory in the 2007 Randox Aintree Grand National thrust Gordon Elliott into the spotlight; on Saturday the Irishman is in pursuit of records and redemption in the world’s most famous steeplechase. Subsequently preparing Tiger Roll to win back-to-back in 2018-19 means Elliott has a record-equalling fourth National in his sights, joining legendary figures in Fred Rimell and Red Rum’s trainer Ginger McCain. Should one of his seven runners emerge on top, it will be a stunning sporting achievement in the space of just a decade and a half. But on racing’s shop-window event of the year it would also be the most public possible confirmation of his reputational rehabilitation. Just over a year ago the work that inspired one of the most unlikely success stories in sport looked like counting for little as Elliott began a six-month suspension. The notorious image taken two years previously of him sitting on a dead horse had engulfed racing in controversy. That some of that reaction bordered on the hysterical, considering Elliott was guilty of crassness rather than cruelty, might be clear now but such perspective was scarce at the time. The future looked bleak for the ex-amateur jockey with no racing background who’d scaled the heights and then plumbed the reputational depths. The start of an astonishing comeback began in September and already yielded big race successes that have underlined how it is business as usual for Elliott within the sport. The biggest race of all however, and the attention that comes with a 600 million global audience, promises wider validation. Delta Work leads Elliott team’s into the 178th renewal of a race that continues to enthrall a wider public that might normally might adopt a ‘take it or leave it’ policy to the old game. The horse that proved the ultimate spoilsport at Cheltenham last month when denying Tiger Roll a perfect swansong in the Cross-Country will attempt to emulate his former stable companion in the biggest chasing challenge of all. The Cross-Country reinvigorated Tiger Roll for Aintree’s unique test; if it has done the same for Delta Work he could be a handicap snip given his previous Grade One exploits. Michael O’Leary’s Gigginstown Stud team has four other chances including the fancied Death Duty, Run Wild Fred who will be partnered by the veteran Davy Russell, and the enigma that is Samcro. Counting Rule The World’s 2016 victory, the Ryanair boss will become the National’s most successful ever owner if winning for a fourth time. Popular bandwagon JP McManus also has a handful of chances topped by last year’s winner Minella Times. The horse that gave Rachael Blackmore a moment for the ages in 2021 carries topweight this time and no less than Red Rum in 1974 was the last horse to successfully manage that task. Minella Times’ form has been sub-par so far this season but the same can hardly be said for his rider. Blackmore has an opportunity to become the first jockey in 20 years to complete the Cheltenham Gold Cup–Grand National double in the same season. Given her profile, a popular bandwagon of support for the Irishwoman could easily emerge come off time at 5.15pm on Saturday. Bookmakers have been wary of last year’s third, Any Second Now, in the run up to the race. Ted Walsh is chasing a second National after Papillon 22 years ago and Any Second Now must be a leading contender given how he overcome traffic problems to run so well last year. The 2021 race saw an unprecedented rout by Irish horses with only the sixth, Blaklion, disrupting the first 11 raiders home. Numerically the raiders hold an edge for the first time ever in the National history with 21 of the 40 runners although there is growing confidence behind one home hope in particular. How the grey mare Snow Leopardess has rejuvenated her racing career, having had a foal, is one of those heartwarming stories the National seems to specialise in. Only 13 mares have won the race and the last, Nickel Coin, was in 1951. Snow Leopardess has winning form over the fences and given her back-story the potential for a massive public gamble exists with her too. For once Willie Mullins isn’t centre-stage despite having four runners but another former winner, Martin Brassil, could again be a major player through Longhouse Poet. Last year’s 150-1 Irish Grand National winner Freehweelin Dylan is in there swinging as well while with a better preparation and first-time cheekpieces, last year’s seventh Discorama could be a touch of betting value. Gordon Elliott is already part of Aintree history which includes 28 Irish -trained winners of the most famous race of all. Silver Birch set him on his way. Another success in 2022 though might mean the most of all. 1. Delta Work. 2. Discorama. 3. Run Wild Fred. 4. Fiddlerontheroof