A total of 2,000 artists will be given a basic income of €325 per week, under plans approved by the Government on Tuesday. The Basic Income for Arts Pilot Scheme was launched following cabinet on Tuesday. The artists will be chosen at random and receive the stipend over a three year period. Speaking at the launch of the initiative, the Taoiseach said the very notion of Irishness was inextricable from artistic traditions of storytelling, expression through music and other forms. He said the scheme had the potential to be as significant an intervention as other steps take to support creative communitie thourgh the history of the state, dsuch as the creation of the arts council in the 1950s. He said the overarching aim of the scheme was to address the “earnings instability” and also to inform future policies in the area. “This pilot scheme has the potential to change tha landscape of the arts in Ireland and how we fund it,” he said. Smoking ban Tánaiste Leo Varadkar said the scheme would rank alongside the smoking ban and the plastic bag levy in that it would be recognized overseas as an Irish policy intervention that would have wider applications in other jurisdictions. He said the Pandemic Unemployment Payment was a “lifeline” to the arts “but I know that isn’t what you wanted,” he said, and that artists would prefer to be working and earning rather than relying on the State. The basic income was the main recommendation arising rom the report of the Arts and Culture Recovery Taskforce - live worth living - which was launched by Minister for the Arts Catherine Martin in 2020. Ms Martin said the measure is a research project and builds on recent efforts to highlight the need to support incomes in the arts. She said the scheme delivered on the recommendations of the recovery taskforce, and she said it was a “once in a generation, transformationoal” measure for the arts. She said it reflected the value of the arts for their intrinsic value and how they impacted personal and collective wellbeing in the State. “For generations, Irish artists have inspired people all over the world,” she said, adding that the scheme would be a “watershed” moment for the arts. The payment was not a social welfare support but a payment in recognition of the value of creative and artistic work, saying how people “leaned into the work of artisits during times of need”, especially during the Covid-19 pandemic. “It is the arts that will help us make sense of what happened and help us shape the future,” she said, adding that she is determined the pandemic does not do permanent damage to the arts sector. Claire Duignan, who chaired the taskforce on recovery in the arts, told the launnch that the central recommendation of a basic income scheme was identified “from the very start” of its work, to address the risk they identified of people drifting away from the arts during the pandemic due to income insecurity. “It’s hugely satisfying to be here today for the launch of this scheme,” she said. She said the arts were pillars of the creative, cultural, tourism and other sectors. “Protecting, supporting, nurturing and valuing the artist” was the most important thing a country could do to support the arts, she said. She said there should not be an annual debate over how much to allocate to the scheme. The scheme will be “non-competitive”, the Department of Arts said in a statement, and that once someone satisfies the eligibility criteria, they will be be able to enter into the randomized selection process. The payment will be taxable, but the amount of tax paid will depend on individual levels of income. Eligibility is to be determined by the deficiotn of the arts contained in the Arts Act 2003, meaning expression in a variety of forms including theatre, literature, music, dance and others. Guidelines for the scheme will be available on the Department’s website on Tuesday.