Former RTÉ journalist Charlie Bird’s charity climb has raised more than €2 million for Pieta House and the Irish Motor Neurone Disease Association. Thousands of people joined hundreds of climbing events across Ireland and the world on Saturday, for ‘Climb with Charlie’, a charity drive organised by the veteran RTÉ broadcaster. Mr Bird announced he was diagnosed with motor neurone disease last October, and the condition has already greatly affected his voice. He then organised a campaign to support mental health charity Pieta House and the Irish Motor Neurone Disease Association, encouraging people across the globe to set up their own walks and climbs. Mr Bird was joined on his climb up Croagh Patrick in Co Mayo by his wife, Claire, and his daughters Orla and Neasa. The Late Late Show presenter Ryan Tubridy, singer Daniel O’Donnell, former boxer Barry McGuigan, musician Matt Molloy and celebrity architect Dermot Bannon were also in attendance, as were thousands of supporters and well-wishers. Mr Bird completed the 764m-high ascent shortly before 1pm. At the peak of the mountain, he said “something spiritual” has been moving him forward. “But today is not about me, it is about everyone who has a terminal illness. And after the last couple of years that we have all gone through, with Covid, we know that many people have had their own personal mountains to climb every day,” he said. Mr Bird added that he does not know how much longer he will live for, but he will continue to extend the hand of friendship to everyone he meets for the remainder of the time he has left. He said as a journalist for 40 years he knew how generous Irish people were, but the outpouring of support he received over the past few months truly stunned him. “Even though I still cry a lot and with my motor neurone, crying is not that unusual; most times that I cry now is as a result of the kindness that is being extended to me every day.” Songs While on top of the mountain, Daniel O’Donnell sang the Bruce Springsteen song Dream Baby Dream, which had been played at Charlie and Claire’s wedding in 2016. The song Irish Heroes, written by Des Cafferkey of the Clew Bay Pipe Band in the aftermath of the Rescue 116 helicopter crash off Blacksod, was also played, and that left Mr Bird breaking down in tears. Mr Bird lit five candles at the top of the mountain, one for women’s health campaigner Vicky Phelan, who was unable to attend the climb but sent well-wishes. The other candles were lit for people with a terminal illness, those in a dark place with their mental health, as well as for everyone involved in the fight against Covid. The final candle was lit for the people of Ukraine, in solidarity with those who have been killed, injured and displaced by the war with Russia. Mr Bird tweeted a message of thanks to everyone on Sunday. He said he was “completely blown away” by the amazing support from all over Ireland and abroad. “I cried so much yesterday, but they were all tears of joy. A big loving hug to everyone. Thanks everyone.” Donations are still being accepted at climbwithcharlie.ie.