Since Olena Shokhina’s arrival to Portlaoise two weeks ago, she has received nothing but warmth and support. Now, in an attempt to give back to the community, she has decided to take part in the town’s clean-up week. Ms Shokhina left Kyiv with her three children on March 1st, travelling to Slovakia, before getting a bus to Prague and flying to Dublin on March 7th. The family lived in a hotel in Dublin for just over a month before being allocated temporary accommodation in Portlaoise. “The worst stress was the first few days. I decided to leave Ukraine because of the kids and I heard Ireland is a great, welcoming country,” she said. “The community helped me and my family very much. We got accommodation, help with information, school and clothes. Everything. We are very happy.” It is estimated that to date about 300 Ukrainians have arrived in Co Laois, with some being housed by families. But most are staying in temporary accommodation, including at hotels in Portlaoise, Abbeyleix, Durrow, Clonaslee, Mountmellick and other locations countywide. Volunteers from the community have set up a zero-cost shop, containing everything the refugees may need including clothes, food, sanitary products, shoes and toys for children. “We went only with a small suitcase, and some of our things we had to leave behind on our journey. So we got some things, like clothes from the shop.” It is because of this kindness, said Ms Shokhina, that refugees in the community are joining the Tidy Town’s annual clean-up, which is returning for the first time since the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic. “This community and this town accepted us so warmly and the hospitality is wonderful so I want to give my best to help. I want to play our part, because it’s like our home now,” she said. Portlaoise Tidy Towns and Laois Integration Committee, alongisde the refugees, are meeting at Lyster Square on Wednesday evening to tackle the issue of litter in their local area. Zero-cost shop Karen McHugh, chairwoman of Laois Integration Network, said it is “astounding” that these people who fled a war-town country were already thinking of wanting to give back to the community. “Since the opening of our zero-cost shop at Bull Lane in Portlaoise, the committee has welcomed hundreds of Ukrainian refugees to the shop. The refugees are able to take whatever they need during their difficult time and so many are now volunteering in the shop too,” she said. “We are so grateful to the donations given to date by the Laois community.” Chairman of Portlaoise Tidy Towns Gerry Brown esaid they were delighted when contacted by Laois Integration Network. “We are always looking for volunteers and this is a lovely gesture from the Ukrainian refugees. We look forward to welcoming them to our Tidy Towns community,” he added.