Six Nations: England vs Ireland, Sunday April 24th, Welford Road (kick-off 12pm, live on Virgin Media Two and BBC Two) Greg McWilliams has made a number of changes to Ireland’s match-day squad ahead of Sunday’s Six Nations clash away to England. Due to both injury and a number of players linking up with the Sevens squad, six new faces come into the starting XV with four more on the bench. Railway Union’s Molly Scuffil-McCabe is set for a debut at fullback, one of five changes to the backline with all of the outside back positions changing from the Italy win in Musgrave Park. Eimear Considine - who most recently played for Ireland at fullback - starts on the left wing while Aoife Doyle is promoted from the bench to the other backthree spot. After initially missing out on the Six Nations squad as a whole, Sene Naoupu starts at outside centre after being called up in place of the Sevens contingent. UL’s Enya Breen starts alongside her in midfield. the halfback pairing of Nicole Cronin and Kathryn Dane is unchanged. The frontrow is also a settled trio as Christy Haney keeps her place after impressing at tighthead. Sam Monaghan is injured and drops out of the secondrow as Aoife McDermott replaces her, while Dorothy Wall, Edel McMahon and Hannah O’Connor all keep their places in the backrow. On the bench, Aoife Wafer has also been ruled out by a knock and is replaced by Maeve Óg O’Leary. Grace Moore is in line to win her second cap as secondrow cover while her clubmate Niamh Byrne is set for a debut in the 23 shirt. Michelle Claffey is the other new face among the replacements. Commenting on the selecting a side minus the Sevens participants, McWilliams highlighted the opportunity presented to others to step up in their place. “This is an exciting opportunity for players who are desperate for the chance to showcase their talent on the biggest stage,” he said. “ As we embark on this journey as a group, we need to test the squad depth, build the playing pool and competition within the dressing room, and there is no greater challenge than facing this world-class England side in front of what will be a record crowd. “A special mention to our two new caps who have earned their opportunity to pull on the green jersey. To Molly and Niamh, congratulations on your selection, enjoy every moment of the experience and be yourselves this weekend. A big challenge is ahead of us but we’ll learn a lot about ourselves and this week has been all about us and what we can bring to the occasion.” England have named a strong side as they look for a victory that would set up a Grand Slam decider against France in the final round of action. Most notably, Emily Scarratt is set to earn her 100th cap at her home ground in Leicester while scrumhalf Leanne Infante also passes the 50 cap milestone. England: Helena Rowland; Lydia Thompson, Emily Scarratt, Holly Aitchison, Jessica Breach; Zoe Harrison, Leanne Infante; Vickii Cornborough, Lark Davies, Sarah Bern; Zoe Aldcroft, Abbie Ward; Alex Matthews, Marlie Packer, Sarah Hunter (capt). Replacements: Amy Cokayne, Hannah Botterman, Maud Muir, Rosie Galligan, Poppy Cleall, Natasha Hunt, Amber Reed, Ellie Kildunne. Ireland: Molly Scuffil-McCabe (Railway Union RFC/Leinster); Aoife Doyle (Railway Union RFC/Munster), Sene Naoupu (Old Belvedere RFC/Leinster), Enya Breen (UL Bohemian RFC/Munster), Eimear Considine (UL Bohemian RFC/Munster); Nicole Cronin (UL Bohemian RFC/Munster), Kathryn Dane (Old Belvedere RFC/Ulster); Linda Djougang (ASM Romagnat Rugby/Leinster), Neve Jones (Gloucester-Hartpury/Ulster), Christy Haney (Blackrock College RFC/Leinster); Nichola Fryday (Exeter Chiefs/Connacht)(capt), Aoife McDermott (Railway Union RFC/Leinster); Dorothy Wall (Blackrock College RFC/Munster), Edel McMahon (Wasps/IQ Rugby), Hannah O’Connor (Blackrock College RFC/Leinster). Replacements: Emma Hooban (Blackrock College RFC/Leinster), Chloe Pearse (UL Bohemian RFC/Munster), Katie O’Dwyer (Railway Union RFC/Leinster), Grace Moore (Railway Union RFC/IQ Rugby), Maeve Óg O’Leary (Blackrock College RFC/Munster), Aoibheann Reilly (Blackrock College RFC/Connacht), Michelle Claffey (Blackrock College RFC/Leinster), Niamh Byrne (Railway Union RFC/Leinster).