The owner of  Dundrum Town Centre, Hammerson,  is to lodge fast-track plans with An Bord Pleanála in the coming days for an 881-unit apartment scheme for Dundrum. Hammerson subsidiary Dundrum Retail GP DAC ’s Strategic Housing Development (SHD)proposal is to include a “landmark” 16-storey apartment block at the northernmost point of the site. The scheme is to be made up of 11 blocks across four zones, and the developers are seeking an eight-year planning permission to complete the plan. The project will consist of 335 one-bedroom apartments, 464 two-bedroom units, and 82 three-bedroom apartments. Dundrum Retail GP DAC put its plan to An Bord Pleanála for a pre-planning consultation last year. The original scheme comprised 889 units and, after the appeals board advised in January that the scheme required further consideration or amendment, the developers removed eight apartments from the proposal. The scheme is to also include 10 retail units, a retail foodstore, four cafe/restaurants and a creche. In addition, the scheme will also include a proposal for a new public open space, to be known as Church Square, to the rear of Holy Cross church. Vehicular link The developers are proposing 681 car-parking spaces and 3,087 bicycle spaces. The scheme would include a lower ground floor car park that will have a vehicular link under the Ballinteer Road to connect to the Dundrum Town Centre basement car-parking area. The scheme is located on the site of the old Dundrum shopping centre and adjacent properties to the west of Main Street in the village. The published planning notice says that an environmental impact statement is to be lodged with the plans, and notes that the scheme materially contravenes the Dún Laoghaire-Rathdown County Development Plan except for zoning purposes. Separately, plans are to be lodged in the coming days to An Bord Pleanála for two SHD schemes in north Dublin. Jacko Investments is to seek planning permission at the Lord Mayor’s public house, Main Street, Swords for the demolition of the existing three-storey pub, restaurant and off-licence and construction of 146 apartments made up of 69 one-bedroom units, 68 two-bedroom units and nine three-bedroom units. The scheme is to comprisefour blocks ranging in height from four to six storeys. The appeals board rejected a 172-unit apartment development for the same site in 2020. In another SHD scheme proposal, Eastwise Construction Swords Ltd is to lodge plans for 472 units for Hartfield Place in Whitehall, Dublin 9. The scheme is made up of seven apartment blocks rising to eight storeys in height. The 472 units are made up of 32 studios, 198 one-bedroom units, 233 two-bedroom units and nine three-bedroom apartments. The appeals board has a target of making decisions on SHD applications within 16 weeks, though it can also defer them beyond that timeframe.