Dublin 0-24 Wexford 0-22 Donal Burke proved the inspiration as he inspired Dublin to a thrilling two point victory over Wexford in this Leinster round robin senior hurling championship game played at Chadwicks Wexford Park. The exciting attacker finished the game with a total of 0-12, with 0-4 from play, but it was his ability to pick off points from a variety of angles through crucial stages of this tense seventy minutes that proved inspirational to his side. Dublin proved once again that they can mix it with the best with the returning Riain McBride and Aidan Mellett into the attack, having missed the Laois victory, proving a huge boost as both players struck over two excellent points apiece as the side played their way through the game, In the congested middle third of the pitch Dublin proved their physicality as they continually won the hard ball, but it was their composed, skilful hurling, that saw them create the space resulting in some excellent scores. With so much of the game played in this territory through the opening period, the Dublin half-back line of Donnacha Ryan, Paddy Smyth and James Madden was simply outstanding, while Cian O’Callaghan was curtailing the attacking threat of Rory O’Connor. Team captain Eoghan O’Donnell proved an inspiration right through the seventy minutes as he totally eclipsed the threat of Conor McDonald, while up front Burke once again showed why he is one of the most skilful attackers in the game with class scores both from play and frees. Given the task facing them having dropped a crucial home point to Galway in their opening game, Wexford felt the pressure, as their defence was continually exposed to the quick crossfield ball despite the best efforts of Damian Reck toi repulse the threat. It was in attack that they failed to fire as the starting half-forward line failed to register a single score from play. Wexford were wasteful with their hard-won possession, striking a total of eighteen wides, compared to the oppositions eleven, but it was Fanning’s failure to convert that penalty that came back to haunt them, with keeper Sean Brennan affecting a magnificent save. After the sides had exchanged points, Rory O’Connor putting the homeside in front with a second minute pointed free, the only time they led in the game, it was a Burke free that brought the sides level. What an inspiration full-back Eoghan O’Donnell proved through the seventy minutes. It was his moment of brilliance that saw him drive from defence deep into Wexford territory before firing over a huge fifth minute point, giving his side a 0-2 to 0-1 lead, they were never subsequently to lose it. With Burke now finding the range from a variety of angles, both from frees and play, Dublin cruised into a 0-7 to 0-2 lead by the fifteen minute mark, but when Rory O’Connor dispatched an excellent point the home side’s roar was heard for the first time. Still, the visitors were enjoying the greater possession, spraying the ball about into the open spaces as they continually stretched the home defence, and with Burke, Conor Burke and Riain McBride also getting in on the scoring act, they maintained their dominance. Chin, free, and Chris Crummey went on to exchange points, but the Dubs were clinging to 0-24 to 0-20 lead entering the closing minutes. They continued to battle for every ball with O’Donnell and Bellew plucking a couple of dangerous high balls from into their area from the air as they repulsed Wexford attack after attack, with the visiting supporters now beginning to sense victory. While Chin pointed two frees in additional time it was the visitors who held out in a dramatic finish to clinch the points, leaving Mattie Kenny and his backroom to celebrate a dramatic victory that leaves them ideally placed to clinch a top three spot, having taken four points from their two games played. This victory on the road that is sure to inspire confidence in the players for their games ahead, particularly against Galway and Kilkenny, with also a clash against Westmeath, but for Wexford the defeat could signal the end of their championship aspirations. Their final game away to Kilkenny could yet prove crucial. Dublin: S Brennan; J Bellew, E O’Donnell (0-1), C O’Callaghan; D Ryan (0-1), P Smyth, J Madden; C Burke (0-2), C Crummey (0-1); D Burke (0-12, eight frees), R McBride (0-2), D Sutcliffe; A Mellett, R Hayes (0-3), F Whitely (0-2). Subs: D Keogh for C Burke (60 mins), P Crummey for Whitely (68 mins), E Dillon for Hayes (72 mins). Wexford: M Fanning (0-3, three frees); S Donohoe (0-1), L Ryan, M O’Hanlon; C Flood (0-1), D Reck (0-3), P Foley; L Og McGovern (0-1), D O’Keeffe (0-1); M Dwyer, O Foley, C McGuckin; R O’Connor (0-6, five frees), C McDonald (0-1), K Foley. Subs: C Dunbar for K Foley (h-t), L Chin (0-5, four frees, one ‘65) for Dwyer (42 mins), O Pepper for O Foley (63 mins), C Hearne for McGuckin (71 mins). Referee: F Horgan (Tipperary).