A man has been arrested in Sligo following the murder and mutilation of two men in the town in recent days. Gardaí believe the deaths are linked and there is suspicion that the killer may have carried out a third attack in the area which left a man with serious eye injuries. The wounds inflicted on the deceased are understood to be similar and there are suspicions both men met their attacker online. The latest victim, a man in his 50s, was found dead in an apartment at Connaughton Road at 10.30pm on Tuesday night with what gardaí described as “significant physical injuries”. It followed the discovery on Monday evening of the body of Aidan Moffitt (41) in his home in Cartron, 2km outside the town. The wounds inflicted on the two deceased men are understood to have been similar. Gardaí suspect Mr Moffitt, a Fine Gael activist, had invited the attacker into his home after meeting him on a dating app. On Tuesday, they appealed for people to take precautions when meeting strangers online. They said they are also investigating if there was a “hate-related motive” to his murder. Both victims were single men who lived alone. Following the discovery of the second body on Tuesday night, armed gardaí flooded the town as they tried to track down the suspect. “At approximately 1.45am following intense local Garda activity and enquiries, gardaí in Sligo assisted by the Armed Support Unit arrested a male in his early 20s in Sligo town on suspicion of murder,” the Garda said in a statement. Footage seen by the Irish Times appears to show armed gardaí removing several people from a property on Mail Coach Road, about 1km from Connaughton Road, in the early hours. Property raided A second property on Markievicz Heights, just outside the town, was raided by armed gardaí around the same time. “This scene remains preserved and the Garda Technical Bureau will conduct technical and forensic examinations at the apartment,” he said, adding that a postmortem would be carried out later on Wednesday and this would assist in the course of the investigation. “The suspect is being detained for questioning at Sligo Garda station under Section Four of Criminal Justice Act 1984.” Anyone with information about the incident is asked to contact Sligo Garda station on (071) 9157088, the Garda Confidential Line on 1800 666 111 or any Garda station. Mr Moffitt, who worked in the property sector and was a peace commissioner for his local area, served on a voluntary basis on a number of local communities and was very active with the Fine Gael party. He ran a company called Hazelfort which was involving in the selling of homes in Sligo and was a graduate of UCD and the Institute of Technology in Sligo. Close friend and fellow Fine Gael activist Blaine Gaffney said he was an “all-round good guy”.