Contentious plans by Dublin airport operator DAA to install a paid tolling system for a new drop-off and pick-up zone at the State’s busiest airport have been challenged. The sole objector to the scheme at Fingal County Council, Independent councillor Joe Newman, has launched an appeal with An Bord Pleanála against the controversial proposal. Mr Newman told the appeals board that DAA’s application “strikes a balance in favour of their financial interests over the stability and quality of the public realm”. He has requested that An Bord Pleanála stage an oral hearing into his appeal. In a supporting submission Fine Gael Senator Emer Currie criticised the planned tolling system, describing it as a “ money-grabbing exercise”. Last month DAA stated that the new tolling system was part of its sustainability agenda. However, in a stinging riposte Senator Currie said “the only ‘green agenda’ here is the colour of the money DAA would serve [sic] to gain from it”. She said there was no need for a tolling system, and introducing it at the current time “obviously and insensitively overlooked” the background of spiralling living costs. “If planning permission for tolling infrastructure does go ahead I am seeking a condition that no charges are introduced until such a time as Dublin airport is serviced by adequate public transport links,” she said. Asked to comment on the appeal, DAA group head of communications Kevin Cullinane said on Tuesday: “We note the appeal. Our focus right now is on the restoration of efficient operations at Dublin airport as passenger numbers rebound following two years of very low numbers due to the pandemic.” Last month Mr Cullinane outlined the rationale behind the new tolling system, saying it aimed to reduce car journeys to and from the airport and to encourage passengers to make greater use of public transport. He said funds raised by the new system would be ringfenced for sustainability initiatives at the airport. DAA has said it is not planning for the system to be in place for the upcoming summer season. It said it intended to start work on the scheme in the second half of 2022.