Are you a saver or a spender? I consider myself to have a balance of both. However, I’m mostly a saver and I’ve always had the mindset to have enough saved for a rainy day. Do you shop around for better value? Yes. While I’m happy to spend the money to get high-quality items, I don’t like paying more for the same thing. For purchases such as insurance, I will always shop around and carry out research. What has been your most extravagant purchase and how much did it cost? My most extravagant purchase was during a work trip in Cape Town. A few of us went to one of the top-25 restaurants in the world and ordered an 11-course tasting menu. It cost €300 per head, but I have to say it was an amazing once-in-a-lifetime experience. What purchase have you made that you consider the best value for money? Probably my car, an Opel Insignia. I’ve had it for four years and thankfully I have had no problems with it. How did you prefer to shop during the Covid-19 restrictions – online or local? I like both but I would always strive to shop local. For Christmas just gone, I organised gift hampers for the office and everything in them was locally sourced. Do you haggle over prices? When it comes to business, and having worked in sales, I have a lot of experience in negotiating, but personally, I don’t. How has the Covid-19 crisis changed your spending habits? The pandemic has changed my spending habits a lot. I haven’t bought much business attire as my meetings moved online, so my wardrobe changed to a more casual look. Nowadays, my spending goes towards DIY and household appliances. Do you invest in shares? No, I wouldn’t have much interest. Cash or card? Card – I love the convenience! What was the last thing you bought and was it good value for money? Without a doubt, my Barbour jacket. It was good value for money, great quality and it will last a lifetime. Have you ever successfully saved up for a relatively big purchase? I have always saved up when buying a new car, and when we were building our house we were able to put savings towards it. Have you ever lost money? No, I’ve been very lucky! Are you a gambler and, if so, have you ever had a big win? I’m not a gambler, but a few years back I did have a big win at the races – I bet a tenner each way and won €300. Is money important to you? Money is not my primary motivator and it never has been. It’s important, however, to have enough money to not have to worry, and I always want to have enough to support others where I can. How much money do you have on you now? Some loose change that probably amounts to about €3 – I use my card for everything! In conversation with Tony Clayton-Lea