Goatstown Close is one of Dublin 14’s secret addresses. Accessed via Hollywood Park, off the Goatstown Road and just up the road from the Goat Bar & Grill, it is in essence a long and ambling estate of about 90 terraced houses with a green at its heart. It was built by Collen Construction as a social and affordable housing scheme for Dún Laoghaire-Rathdown County Council in 2008 and bounds Ardilea Crescent, the O’Malley Construction development of apartment blocks and houses, and Trimleston, and so borders both Clonskeagh and Goatstown. Number 67 is at the very far end of the complex in a cul-de-sac of about 10 homes. The two-bedroom terraced property is very nicely laid out with dual-aspect rooms on either side of its hall, off which is a guest toilet with a window. To the left is a living room where large windows that extend to about 65 per cent of the wall space wash it in light. Across the hall is the eat-in kitchen where there is access, through sliding glass doors, to a wide garden. Private and mainly laid out in lawn it has a south-westerly aspect, is more than 8m wide and almost 45sq m in all. There’s also a good deal of space in the front garden for bins and to install a bike rack should you need one. A rooflight washes the stairwell in light and upstairs there are two fine-size double bedrooms, one at either end of the house. The main has lots of wardrobe space. These rooms share a bright family bathroom. and there is plenty of storage throughout including under the stairs. Agent DNG is seeking €425,000 for the 80sq m (861sq ft)property which has a C2 Ber and is ready to move into. While the privacy of a cul de sac is really welcome, it does mean that a walk to the nearest shop is slightly longer than as the crow flies. On foot the nearest place for a pint of milk is Lynam’s Fine Foods in Friarsland, which also stocks an impressive array of home-cooked meals. If you don’t feel like cooking at all then you can stroll down to pan-Asian neighbourhood restaurant HX46 or up to the grill at the Goat.