The second online lottery for 38 “brown tags” on the Lower River Lee in Cork will be issued on Monday, April 11th. The deadline to enter the lottery is midnight on Friday, April 8th. To boost conservation efforts, anglers who wish to catch and keep wild salmon from the Lee this year are being reminded that brown-tag regulations are in force until the season closes on September 30th. The measures are included in the Wild Salmon and Sea Trout Tagging Scheme (Amendment) Regulations, signed into law by the Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications, Eamon Ryan. Under brown-tag regulations, an angler must attach a brown tag and a standard blue tag to the fish. To help conserve stocks, a total of 152 brown tags will be available for the season and distributed to those with a valid 2022 rod licence through a series of four online lotteries. Anglers interested in entering the draw on April 11th are being asked to email their request to 2022corkleebrowntag@fisheriesireland.ie up to Friday, April 8th. Within this email, anglers must provide their name, address and telephone number and quote their 2022 Salmon Licence number (including letter prefix). Only one entry is permitted per licence holder. Those who received a tag in the last draw are permitted to enter this draw only if they have used their tag. Evidence must accompany the entry with a photo of the salmon double tagged and entry in their angler’s logbook. Anglers with a 2022 rod licence who are not allocated a brown tag are only permitted to fish for salmon on a catch-and-release basis on the Lee, where the salmon is returned safely to the same waterbody. Further details are available at fisheriesireland.ie or by contacting Macroom office on (026) 41221. Coaching sessions Erne anglers took full advantage of the good weather to deliver coaching in Fermanagh and Omagh last week. A number of sessions aimed at schools and community groups were held as they progress with their “Get Outdoors – Go Fishing” initiative supported by Sport Northern Ireland Communities and Fermanagh Omagh District Council. The scheme, which aims to see up to 200 novice anglers achieve Level One of the angler skills programme, is a six-step pathway leading to a lifetime participation in angling. Additionally, two sessions were held at Garvary Lake in Enniskillen as part of the Fermanagh Omagh District Council’s “Come Try It” programme, at which plenty of fish were caught. Canal championships After a two-year break due to Covid, the All-Ireland Canal Open Championships return to the Grand Canal as a one-day competition on Sunday, April 24th. Advance booking is required by April 15th to Seán Ward at 086 811 5526. Entry fee is €30 for members and €35 non-members. €5 pegging administration fee also applies. See ncffi.ie for competition rules. No bloodworm or joker allowed. Leinster League 10th round The fish were few and far between for the 10th round of the Leinster League at Kilooney Fisheries in Kildare on Sunday, March 27th. Nevertheless, the change of venue from the canals presented an enjoyable challenge in the bright sunshine. Results: Overall winners: 1), Dermot O’Farrell, 4lb 1oz; 2), John Jourj, 3lb 9oz; 3), Pat Bartley, 2lb 4oz. The Leinster federation welcome guests to their matches. For an upcoming list of events visit ncffi.ie/eventscalendar/ or contact Ambrose Devlin on 087 628 8387. Calendar changes The National Coarse Fishing Federation of Ireland (NCFFI) committee has refreshed the national championship calendar to include: * canal championships – now a one day event, April 24th; * commercial pairs championship – extended to two days; qualifiers introduced to support the method feeder championships; * new lure boat championships; * two dedicated junior events, any method and feeder only. Venues and booking details to follow. For the full calendar of club competitions and festivals, see ncffi.ie/competition. If you have an angling story to share, please send to me at angling@irishtimes.com