Any further Government measures to address the current cost-of-living squeeze should be targeted at lower income, rural and older households, the Oireachtas Committee on Budgetary Oversight has said. In a report ahead of next week’s Stability Programme Update (SPU), the committee singled out those groups as the most vulnerable to the current surge in energy costs because of the percentage of disposable income spent on fuel and energy. More targeted supports would help alleviate the financial stress on the most impacted households while limiting the potential of adding to inflationary pressures, it said. Measures The committee also recommended that all future measures be accompanied by an analysis of the expected impact on different households and income deciles. The Government will next week published its latest SPU, which sets out its growth and tax projections for the year. It comes at a time of increased uncertainty about the economic outlook, aggravated by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and soaring energy prices. The SPU is also expected to include a forecast on the potential impact of an energy supply shock on the Irish economy. In its report, the committee noted the Ukrainian crisis has created a shock to growth that was not anticipated while noting that inflationary pressures in the Irish economy were already building before the crisis. It also advocated that corporation tax receipts above what is considered sustainable be placed in a new rainy day fund and used only for one off spending. Exchequer returns, published this week, show the Government has collected just under €1.9 billion in corporation tax this year, 224 per cent up on last year. However, this reflected earlier-than-expected payments from several companies that had been due in August. Engagement Launching the report, committee chair Neasa Hourigan said the SPU was an important part of the budgetary process. “Pre-SPU scrutiny is an annual component of the committee’s work programme and enables the committee to have an informed engagement with the Minister of Finance on the medium-term fiscal strategy,” she said. “The committee has set out some risks to the economy that will have to be considered and addressed in fiscal policy. Inflation and the consequences of the Russian invasion of Ukraine will have a significant impact on the Irish economy and the require fiscal responses,” she said.