Shane Lowry continued his fine form on the PGA Tour as he carded an eight-under-par 64 alongside partner Ian Poulter in a fourball at the Zurich Classic of New Orleans. There was no doubt of the star of the team in the opening round as the Offaly man contributed seven of his team’s nine birdies at TPC Louisiana en route to their eight under score. Starting at the 10th, Lowry took charge on his first nine with four birdies, with a wedge to three feet a highlight on the opening hole. On the back nine, three more Lowry birdies followed, including a 40-foot putt from the fringe at the 4th hole. Poulter finally pitched in with a birdie on the 1st hole, chipping from off the green and also added a birdie at the 9th. A bogey at the 6th hole, however, proved an costly error in what is a low-scoring format. Matthew NeSmith and Taylor Moore held the clubhouse lead on 12-under-par, one ahead of Aaron Rai and David Lipsky, Tommy Gainey and Robert Garrigus, and Doc Redman and Sam Ryder. An all-Irish team of Seamus Power and Graeme McDowell made a strong start and were six under after 10 holes, with three birdies each. Masters champion and world number one Scottie Scheffler was at four under after 10 holes, playing alongside 2019 champion Ryan Palmer. Meanwhile, 68-year-old Jay Haas, playing with his son Bill, took a positive step to becoming the oldest player to make a PGA Tour cut after an opening round of 65. The Zurich Classic of New Orleans is an alternating-round fourball and foursomes competition, the first round being fourball, with each team playing their own ball, with the best score on each hole recorded. On the DP World Tour, Johannes Veerman, Tapio Pulkkannen, Hennie Du Plessis and SSP Chawraisia share the lead on six under at the ISPS Handa Championship in Spain. Niall Kearney is the pick of the Irish contingent at one under, while Jonathan Caldwell and Cormac Sharvin are on one over and two over, respectively. On the LPGA Tour, Leona Maguire shot a two-over-par 73 at the DIO Implant LA Open at Wilshire Country Club. Denmark’s Emily Kristine Pedersen leads on four under after an opening round of 67. Stephanie Meadow was at even par after five holes.