Dublin’s Catholic Archdiocese has offered its former seminary at Clonliffe College in Drumcondra for the accommodation of Ukrainian refugees. It’s estimated the facility could hold up to 620 people. A spokesman told The Irish Times that preparatory work would be necessary which could take some weeks. Separately, a collection in aid of Ukraine held in the archdiocese at the last weekend of March raised €3.35 million. Archbishop Eamon Martin of Armagh and Archbishop Dermot Farrell of Dublin, as president and vice-president of the Irish Catholic Bishops’ Conference, issued a statement to thank the parishes across Ireland for their extraordinary generosity. Funds raised “The large funds raised by Irish parishes will be channelled to assist those who are suffering such devastation to their lives and livelihoods,” they said. “Parishes across Ireland have responded with enormous generosity and compassion and we are most grateful for that. It is also heartening that some parish communities have established direct links with Ukrainian parishes and local charitable projects to support refugees and those remaining in Ukraine.” Meanwhile, in Dublin’s Raheny, a vacant parochial house is now occupied by a Ukrainian women and her four children. Her husband has remained at home to fight the Russians. Raheny parish administrator Fr Mick Cullen said they had been planning to sell the house when he was listening to news about Ukraine on the radio “and I said to myself ‘ah, here, come on’” Local help He put it to the parish council and the finance committee that they offer the house to the Red Cross to accommodate people fleeing Ukraine. The response was unanimous and enthusiastic “from everybody. Not one dissented. So we offered the house to the Red Cross.” They inspected it and it was approved. “It all happened within 24 hours. There was a huge level of co-operation from local people in preparing the house for the refugees.” Help also came from Dunnes and SuperValu locally, and Glen Dimplex, all of whom helped furnish and prepare the empty house for occupation. “The Tidy Towns did the garden and a volunteer steam-cleaned the carpets and the driveway,” Fr Cullen added.