US-based technology company NS1 said it plans to hire at least 30 computer engineers in Ireland in the next two years as it establishes an office in Cork and grows its global presence. The company, which specialises in smart network control systems, is hiring for varying levels of expertise and for a number of different backgrounds as it scales its cloud-based NS1 Connect platform, which delivers immediate intelligence and control across infrastructure. NS1 also plans to train emerging talent in the latest cloud technologies and advanced programming languages such as Go. The company will build an engineering centre of excellence, allowing NS1 to access and grow local talent and impact the development of its products. “When locations for expansion were initially explored by NS1, Cork was top of the list for me based on the incredible success I’ve had establishing centres of excellence here in the past,” said David Coffey, chief product officer at NS1. “The type of talent I’ve seen in the Cork market aligns perfectly with our expansion strategy as we build products at a scale to meet global demand.” Staff will have a hybrid model of working, with remote work options available alongside the Cork City office, which will allow Ireland to serve as a hub for future hires throughout Europe. The news was welcomed by Tánaiste and Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment Leo Varadkar. “It’s great news that the company has chosen Cork for this expansion, once again highlighting the rich pool of talent available in the area,” he said. “This new facility will play a key role in the expansion of NS1’s global engineering presence and I wish the team all the best in this exciting new chapter.” The project is being supported by IDA Ireland. “The decision by NS1 to establish in Cork City is terrific news and a welcome addition to the South West region’s strong Technology cluster,” said IDA Ireland’s head of regional business development, Ray O’Connor. “Winning jobs and investment in regional locations continues to be a priority for IDA Ireland.”