Tens of thousands of people are taking part today in almost 200 Climb with Charlie fundraisers to raise money for the Irish Motor Neurone Disease Association and suicide charity Pieta, according to the campaign organisers. The charity campaign, led by broadcaster Charlie Bird who was diagnosed with motor neurone disease last year, has already raised more than €1 million. As part of the fundraiser, Mr Bird (72) is being joined by some 500 “friends and family” on a trek up and down Croagh Patrick. Among those who have taken to the Reek this morning are Mr Bird’s wife, Claire, daughters, Orla and Neasa, and five grandchildren, as well as singer Daniel O’Donnell, Matt Molloy of the Chieftains, boxer Barry McGuigan and the Late Late Show host Ryan Tubridy. In a tweet on Saturday morning, President Michael D Higgins sent “every good wish and warmest support” to Mr Bird. He said: “Charlie’s strength and dignity over recent months has been a source of true inspiration to people across Ireland and beyond. I know that the public will be with him every step of the way.” Separate Climb with Charlie events have also been planned across the world, in countries such as the United States, South Africa, Australia and Spain. Other climbs taking place include a 17.5km hike up Mount Cooke in Western Australia, a 700m-high climb up Ben Gorm in Co Mayo, a 6km night-time trek from Glenmore to Barnavave peak (350m) in Co Louth, and a 494m-high hike up Cnoc Bulaba. The journey up Croagh Patrick began at 9.30am on Saturday from the mountain’s base in Westport, Co Mayo. Met Éireann forecaster Joanna Donnelly, who is taking part in Ireland, said it should be “mainly dry for the country” on Saturday with “scattered showers, though these should be mainly light”. Temperatures were expected to range between seven degrees in the east and about 10 degrees in the west “and as we climb of course it will be colder”. Ahead of the climb Mr Bird, former RTÉ chief news correspondent, said he wanted Saturday to be a day of “joy and celebration”. “I have no idea how many people are going to scale the Reek with me, but I feel it is going to be a day like no other,” he added. Upon reaching the summit, Mr Bird is expected to make a speech to his supporters and light five candles in the mountain’s church; one for his friend Vicky Phelan, one for people suffering a terminal illness, one for anyone in a dark place with their mental health, one for everyone involved in the fight against Covid and one for the people of Ukraine. The Climb with Charlie campaign is still accepting donations on www.climbwithcharlie.ie for the Irish Motor Neurone Disease Association and Pieta.