Twitter is poised to agree a sale to Elon Musk for around $43 billion (€40 billion) in cash, the price the chief executive of Tesla Inc has called his “best and final” offer for the social media company, people familiar with the matter said. Twitter may announce the $54.20-per-share deal later on Monday once its board has met to recommend the transaction to Twitter shareholders, the sources said. It is always possible that the deal collapses at the last minute, the sources added. Mr Musk, the world’s richest person according to a tally by Forbes, is negotiating to buy Twitter in a personal capacity and Tesla is not involved in the deal. Twitter has not been able to secure so far a ‘go-shop’ provision under its agreement with Mr Musk that would allow it to solicit other bids once the deal is signed, the sources said. Offer Still, Twitter would be allowed to accept an offer from another party by paying Mr Musk a break-up fee, the sources added. Twitter and Mr Musk did not immediately respond to requests for comment. Twitter shares were up 4.5 per cent in pre-market trading in New York on Monday at $51.15. Mr Musk has said Twitter needs to be taken private to grow and become a genuine platform for free speech. The deal would come just four days after Musk unveiled a financing package to back the acquisition. This led Twitter’s board to take the deal more seriously and many shareholders to ask the company not to let the opportunity for a deal to slip away, Reuters reported on Sunday. The sale would represent an admission by Twitter that its new chief executive Parag Agrawal, who took the helm in November, is not making enough traction in making the company more profitable, despite being on track to meet ambitious financial goals the company set for 2023. Twitter’s shares were trading higher than Mr Musk’s offer price as recently as November. Mr Musk’s negotiating tactics – making one offer and sticking with it – resembles how another billionaire, Warren Buffett, negotiates acquisitions. Mr Musk did not provide any financing details when he first disclosed his offer for Twitter, making the market skeptical about its prospects. Deficiences Mr Musk (50) has made clear that he sees many deficiencies in Twitter as a social media service. He has said that he wants to “transform” the company as a “platform for free speech around the globe” and that it requires vast improvements in its product and policies. Mr Musk has tried to negotiate with Twitter using the service itself, threatening in several tweets that he might take his bid directly to the company’s shareholders in what is called a “tender offer.” A tender offer is a hostile manoeuvre in which an outside party circumvents a company’s board by asking shareholders to sell their shares directly to them. He has also acted erratically on the platform, raising concerns over how he might manage the service should he be in charge of it. On Saturday, Musk took aim at billionaire Bill Gates because Mr Gates had taken a “short” position on the stock of Tesla, which meant that Gates was betting the carmaker’s shares would fall. On Sunday,Mr Musk tweeted that he was “moving on” from making fun of Gates. Even so, Musk maintains amicable ties with some high-ranking members of Twitter. Over the weekend, Mr Musk traded friendly tweets with Jack Dorsey, company co-founder and a board member. Views Mr Dorsey stepped down as Twitter’s chief executive in November and soon will be leaving its board. Both men share similar views on cryptocurrencies and on promoting more free speech online. When Mr Musk briefly flirted with joining Twitter’s board this month, Mr Dorsey tweeted, “I’m really happy Elon is joining the Twitter board! He cares deeply about our world and Twitter’s role in it.” On Friday, Block, a financial services company led by Mr Dorsey, disclosed he had changed his title at the firm from chief executive to “Block Head.” That shift appeared to resonate with Musk. “Your new title at Block is fire,” Mr Musk tweeted at Dorsey on Saturday, using two flame emoji to signify his approval. Last year, Musk had changed his title at Tesla from chief executive to technoking. – Reuters, New York Times