St Patrick’s Athletic 0 Dundalk 0 There was plenty of endeavour from both teams at Richmond Park on Friday night, but St Patrick’s Athletic and Dundalk had to settle for a draw. Facing St Patrick’s for the first time since his off-season departure from the club, Dundalk boss Stephen O’Donnell kept faith with the same starting 11 that defeated UCD 2-0 seven days earlier. Tim Clancy’s men had much the better of the opening exchanges. Darragh Burns and Billy King were marginally off target, while Ronan Coughlan was also close to breaking the deadlock. However, the hosts suffered a blow when midfielder Adam Murphy – making a first league start on his 17th birthday – was withdrawn through injury, and this coincided with Dundalk growing into the game. Former St Pat’s player Robbie Benson and Patrick Hoban had headers that just cleared the woodwork, and the visitors had reason to feel optimistic heading into the second half. Republic of Ireland Under-21 international Burns proved particularly threatening for St Pat’s down the right-flank. His lofted ball into the box on 63 minutes was met powerfully by the head of Eoin Doyle, but Dundalk goalkeeper Nathan Shepperd superbly tipped the ball over the bar. Moving into the final-quarter, Shepperd again thwarted Doyle with another spectacular close-range stop off a Burns delivery. ST PATRICK’S ATHLETIC: Anang; Abankwah, Redmond, Grivosti, Breslin; O’Reilly, Murphy (McClelland, 24 mins); Burns, Coughlan (M Doyle, 64 mins), King (Owolabi, 84 mins); E Doyle. DUNDALK: Shepperd; Macari, Connolly, Boyle, Leahy; Sloggett (Ward, 77 mins), Doyle (Williams, 46 mins), Benson; Bradley (Adams, 69 mins), Hoban (McMillan, 90 mins), Kelly. Referee: R Harvey (Dublin). Drogheda United 1 Bohemians 1 Dean Williams was the late hero for Drogheda United as Bohemians were denied a second victory in four days despite a largely dominant performance on the banks of the Boyne. Much of the talk surrounding Bohemians’s sluggish start to the season has revolved around how they had lost six key members of their first team in the off-season. However, keeping the talented Dawson Devoy is notable too. Scottish winger Liam Burt netted three times against Drogheda last season meaning his recent hot streak may have arrived at the perfect moment but he wasn’t to be a goalscorer on this occasion. Restored to the starting line up at Head In The Game Park, Devoy opened his account for the campaign from the penalty spot after James Clarke was penalised for handball and Devoy produced an unerring strike from 12 yards. Drogheda came close to levelling when James Talbot saved from Georgie Poynton and then Darragh Nugent. The second was a superb tip around the post, with the recent Republic of Ireland call-up at full stretch. As the hosts increased their stake in possession and territory, Keith Long’s side were dangerous on the break. Drogheda mustered nothing in the second half until their 87th minute equaliser. Bohs went closest through Grant Horton, but his header was wide. Substitute Jordan Flores attempted a spectacular bicycle kick but it was wayward while Promise Omochere was inches from connecting to a cross too, with the goal gaping. Drogheda worked the ball down the left and Williams had space on the edge of the area to find the bottom corner and send the home crowd delirious. DROGHEDA UNITED: Long; Quinn, Roughan, Cowan (Weir, 77), Massey; Deegan, Clarke; Poynton, Nugent (Brennan, 61), Rooney (Grimes, 69); Lyons (Williams, 61). BOHEMIANS: Talbot; Murphy, Horton (Feely, 89), Kelly, Wilson; Coote (Flores, 70), Levingston, Devoy; Twardek (Ogedi-Uzokwe, 80), Omochere, Burt. Referee: Paul McLaughlin.