At SEK Dublin International School, everything we do is based on supporting our students to become questioning and courageous individuals fit for the 21st century, and we have a long history of preparing students for their futures. For over 130 years we have been enabling our students to take their place as global citizens. We are living through a fourth industrial revolution. What began with steam power some 250 years ago is continuing today at a faster pace than ever before with the emergence new digital technologies including automation, artificial intelligence, and the internet of things. Just as in previous revolutions change will be rapid far reaching and unpredictable. A 2017 report by the McKinsey Global Institute estimates that one third of jobs could be displaced by automation by 2030. Change can be disruptive, but it needn´t be feared. Today´s workplace is relying increasingly on creative, analytical, and interpersonal skills. The OECD, in their report on The Future of Education and Skills 2030 outline the knowledge and skills young people will need to thrive in the decades to come. They point to a brave new world of opportunities, but only if students are able to navigate the challenges of our 4th industrial age. In short, you cannot outwork a robot. But, you can outthink and outdream one. A long history of educational innovation We are the first school in Ireland to be certified by the International Baccalaureate Organisation to teach the prestigious Middle Years Programme for students 11-16 years of age and the Diploma Programme for students 16-18 years of age. Indeed, for half a century we have been pioneering the IB in Europe. The IB programmes offer a truly holistic approach to education, one that nurtures the development of all aspects of the learner. The student is challenged intellectually, whilst at the same time learning beyond the classroom to develop emotionally and ethically. The IB, culminating in the Diploma Programme, prepares students for study at the very best universities in Ireland and around the world. Learning to solve real world problems At SEK Dublin International School we have developed a comprehensive Future Learning Model in conjunction with teachers, leaders and learners in our schools across Europe. The look, the shape and the feel of our classrooms are different because the way we teach and learn is different. We promote critical thinking and learning by action. We root learning in real world situations. Students are asked to problem-solve, to apply the knowledge they have learned in new and unfamiliar situations, to make links between seemingly disparate areas of knowledge so, as well as being highly knowledgeable, they are asked to put that knowledge to the test, to be creative and to take risks, to question the status quo. Because learning to question is at the heart of what we do. SEK Dublin is a day and boarding school for girls and boys aged 11-18, set in a stunning natural campus, 35 minutes from Central Dublin. SEK Dublin International School www.sek.ie is part of the SEK Education group, a community of schools who have been collaborating and innovating for over 130 years.