The hunt is on At the K Club, the Easter Bunny has been busy. Find five mini eggs in the gardens, and you get a pass to Easter Island, where the Bunny himself (or possibly herself?) is hanging out, alongside the other animals in the island’s petting zoo. There are also Easter Science Camps on site for kids, so at €10 per hour per child, they can experiment away while you hit the spa, go horse riding, fishing, bashing at golf balls, or whatever takes your fancy. €745 per night for two adults and two children under 12 in interconnecting rooms, plus breakfast and one evening meal. Make it three nights, and the rate goes down to €700 per night. Available until April 24th. kclub.ie Falling for Co Kerry Lovely Sheen Falls Lodge has a sweet package this Easter. Take two nights’ accommodation, plus breakfast and dinner for two on one night, and add two children (your own, presumably) sharing for free if they’re under 12. From €1,190 all in, or take three nights and an extra dinner from €1,785. Available April 15th to 18th. sheenfallslodge.ie Grown-up stuff If Easter offers with free children attached don’t really crack your egg, try the Shelbourne’s special, where you get an overnight for two, a bottle of champagne, and a hand painted Shelbourne chocolate egg. Available until April 21st, for €499 including breakfast – theshelbourne.com. And while you’re there, wander across gorgeous St Stephen’s Green to MoLI, the Museum of Literature Ireland, where their current exhibition Love, says Bloom explores the love James Joyce had for Nora Barnacle and their children Giorgio and Lucia in this Ulysses centenary year. Admission €10, runs until July 3rd. moli.ie On the spiritual side If you’re looking for something on the more spiritual side of Easter, or just fancy a jolly good walk, head for Co Carlow, where the Columban Way launched earlier this spring. Inspired by St Columbanus, the 45km trail takes you from the Nine Stones viewing point on Mount Leinster right along to the Kildare border. St Columbanus himself was born at the foot of Mount Leinster. There are nine maps to help you on your way, and you’ll have a lovely time connecting with nature, and maybe also feeling the vibes of the sixth century monk who believed in partnership, peace, respect and diversity for the good of all. Where else would you stay for a walking holiday than the Step House? The Borris boutique hotel has B&B from €120 per room. stephousehotel.ie Get moving on board Feeling a little sluglike? Not sure a full on choc-fest is what you actually really need? Get moving with the AMA Waterways Cruise, taking you along the Rhine with wellness in mind. Your river cruiser has fitness classes, nutrition chats, core strength workouts and circuits on tap, as well as swimming and plunge pools on deck. On shore, you can avail of bikes, guided hikes and other outings to see the wonders of Cologne, Heidelberg and more en route. Eight days, departing Amsterdam on April 14th, and winding up in Basel, costs €2,689 per person and includes meals, beer, wine and soft drinks with meals, and all excursions. Get to Amsterdam with Aer Lingus, and home from Basel with Ryanair. sunway.ie Cool adventures And while we’re on the subject of cruising, look ahead to a September 18th departure, with the Alaska Fly/Cruise from Cassidy Travel. Fly from Dublin, sleep over in Seattle, then sail for Icy Strait Point, Skagway, Endicott Arm and Dawes Glacier, Juneau, Victoria, and then back to Seattle. Seven nights full board with an inside cabin, including transfers, meals, snacks and “entertainment”, which may or may not to be something to get excited about, costs from €1,749 per person, with upgrades available for a decent view. cassidytravel.ie Free for (almost) all Catch up with the extended family with an offer from IHG Hotels and resorts. Book two rooms for two nights before April 20th at participating hotels across Ireland, the UK, France and Germany, and you get your second room free. They’re calling it the Grandparents Stay For Free offer, but scanning the small print, it can also be any other family members you fancy. Book directly at the microsite for stays until July 15th. You’ll see a charge pop up for the second room, but it will be cancelled out when you check in. In Dublin, your option is the Holiday Inn in the city centre; but head further afield, and I rather like the look of the Holiday Inn in France’s Perpignan, where suites with a balcony start from €134.90 per night. In Berlin, try the Crowne Plaza, from €101 per night; or there’s Edinburgh’s Hotel Indigo, right on Princes Street from €167 per room. Book at ihg.com/grandparents