Connacht, with special memories of overcoming Ulster in the Aviva Stadium, are relishing the prospect of taking another Irish scalp when they face Leinster on Friday evening. The occasion may be different and more illustrious with a Heineken Champions Cup quarter-final up for grabs, but Connacht head coach Pete Wilkins says there is a real buzz in moving the occasion to Ireland’s biggest rugby stadium. “We do have good memories of playing up there and the games in which we have been successful in that environment. It’s not just our internationals, but the guys who played up there with games post-lockdown and the Ulster game more recently. “So there is a real positive vibe in getting to play in a really great stadium, but also knowing we can travel up there and win up there, and against different opposition as well.” However, Wilkins says such excitement must be channelled into delivering a positive performance to overturn the five-point deficit from the first leg. “It will probably be the biggest crowd some of these players have played in front of, so the challenge is how you embrace the occasion, rather than let it consume you. But knowing the personalities and temperament of the lads we will be picking this week, we know they can handle it. So, part of the selection is about rugby, but it’s also about guys who can handle that stage.” Also coming back into contention is prop Denis Buckley, who has recovered from a long term calf injury, while fullback Tiernan O’Halloran and scrum half Kieran Marmion are also available after their respective ankle and face injuries – Leinster’s Jamison Gibson-Park having been cited for his tackle on Marmion with a disciplinary committee hearing by video conference taking place yesterday evening. Having been given little chance last week, Connacht kept in the fight to the end, falling five points short in the 21-26 first leg, but Wilkins says although the players were disappointed, Andy Friend and his coaches were positive. “There was a reassurance we can perform at that level. It comes back to consistency. The way we approached last week, obviously it was a big interpro, but the way the whole squad applied themselves in the week’s build-up – around their analysis of opposition, their diligence in preparation – everything that would go into that kind of performance was there. It was a timely example to the whole group as to what’s possible, and has now set a standard for the group and they need to continue to back it up. Build on “We saw enough to show it works and it is something to build on, and the rational side of our heads was thinking we are in the fight for next week and that was the most important thing. Interestingly, it was more so disappointment that we left a few chances out there in attack and gave them soft opportunities in defence.” The first leg was another step in Connacht’s maturity, particularly in game management. Rather than try to produce a “miracle play to solve the scoreboard in an instant”, Connacht chipped away at Leinster’s lead. “If nothing else the first leg shows we remain diligent in playing our way and taking three points when they come and kicking when we need to, running ball when we get the opportunity – to have that balance to the game, we can stay with them on the scoreboard, so it sets us up nicely for the second game.” However, he insists Connacht still need to take it up a level on Friday evening. “We can’t just think we can roll out exactly the same thing in the same way, so while we won’t change the fundamentals of how we play the game, we cannot deliver the same thing and hope it will be enough. So we will have to go up a level .” With the Lion’s share of the work almost done, there will be little change in the way Connacht play, except, he says, “a few subtleties to keep Leinster guessing”.