New guidelines slashing awards for minor personal injuries are hurting low-income workers and giving a “green light” to exploitative employers, according to a solicitor specialising in personal injury claims. Marcin Szulc, who employs ten people in his Dublin-based firm, said the value of claims has been significantly reduced by the guidelines and they do not allow for properly compensating many claimants, including those on low incomes. Unless the guidelines are modified or scrapped, many people with minor injuries will simply not pursue claims, he predicted. In sanctioning the guidelines, the State and judges “bowed to pressure from insurers” and “have given the green light to calculated exploitation”. Although the guidelines were introduced following a long campaign by the insurance industry, he has not noticed any fall in his insurance costs since the guidelines came into operation a year ago, Mr Szulc added. He was speaking to the Irish Times after the Personal Injuries Assessment Board (PIAB) published a report this week indicating its awards for minor injuries fell by 42 per cent from April 2021, when the guidelines came into operation, and December last. In line with the requirements of the Judicial Council Act, the guidelines were drafted by a committee of the council, comprising all judges here, and adopted by a majority vote of the council in March 2021. Back injury Mr Szulc’s Rostra Solicitors practice near Smithfield represents many low-income plaintiffs from an immigrant background, including meat packers and people working in retail, warehouses and the construction industry. One client, a bin worker, suffered a back injury as a result of pushing a heavy four wheeled industrial bin up a ramp and was out of work for a month but only received an offer from the PIAB of €8,000 general damages, he said. The man rejected the offer and is pursuing litigation. That award contrasted with a €9,000 offer to another client who chipped two teeth after he bit into a wrap which contained stones, Mr Szulc said. That client attended the dentist twice and may have one more visit. Both awards are in line with the guidelines, the solicitor said. “How do you compare those cases? It’s ridiculous.” “I have a PIAB assessment in front of me for €3,200 for a lower back injury where the client was out of work for a month. What will I charge him? If I charge him in line with the section 150 letter I sent to him, the legal costs will be about 50 per cent of the award. “ Mr Szulc believes solicitors, for economic reasons, will be reluctant to take cases likely to attract awards under €5,000 and that in turn will impact on people’s decisions to pursue claims. About 70 per cent of his firm’s work concerns personal injuries and the volume of claims dropped significantly in the past two years as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic, he said. He said he is “kidding myself” that the continuing decline in claims is due to the pandemic rather than the guidelines and believes they have definitely adversely impacted on his practice. The guidelines were drafted by the Judicial Council’s Personal Injuries Guidelines Committee after it looked at the situation in common law jurisdictions such as England and Wales where minor injury awards are lower than in other common law jurisdictions, he said. He considered the decision to look to jurisdictions with lower awards was “deliberate”. Litigation costs Addressing concerns that litigation costs for minor injury claims substantially drive up the overall costs, he said many people have little knowledge how to prepare and advance claims. Many doctors who are asked to prepare medical reports prefer to deal with solicitors, in terms of payment and other issues, rather than claimants directly, he added. “You need legal knowledge and experience to figure out if an assessment is appropriate or not,” he said. “If PIAB was infallible, there would be no need to go to a solicitor. PIAB gets it wrong on many occasions.” According to Mr Szulc, the current system is “stacked” against claimants. Awards are meant to return a person to the same position they were in prior to injury and to discourage acts of negligence, he said. The reduced awards, in his view, mean no incentive for employers to adhere to health and safety considerations. Paying out an award of €5,000 or €9,000 costs less than hiring another worker to ensure safe working conditions and reduce the burden on employees, he said. “I’ve seen plenty of examples of that, big employers taking these calculated risks at the expense of people who break their backs for this country to move forward. Many of my clients came here to make a better living for themselves but they are being exploited.” In a statement, Insurance Ireland CEO Moyagh Murdock described the reduction of PIAB awards as “very welcome” but said the reduction in acceptances by claimants of the awards is “concerning”. The acceptance rate in 2021 was “only 40% overall and 36% for motor claims which make up the majority of all claims” and the worry is that means more cases will go to litigation, she said. Expeditiously For the success of insurance reform in Ireland and the credibility of the guidelines, it will be “essential that the cases are heard expeditiously and that the courts confirm the guidelines in their procedures”. The recently proposed Bill to expand the mandate of PIAB should lead to further efficiencies and significantly less costly legal processes for a greater number of claims, she said. “Insurers have consistently said that consumers will benefit from quicker assessments and swifter claims settlement compared to the very lengthy and costly litigation procedures.” The Irish Small Medium Employers Association (ISME) said the lowering of awards here should be impacting public liability and employers’ liability insurances. ISME CEO Neil McDonnell said, while motor insurance costs have declined from their peak in recent years, businesses “have yet to see similar reductions in public and employer liability premiums”. Small business owners find it “most disquieting”, that while public liability insurance remains so expensive, or not available at all, Irish insurance brokers are being snapped up by foreign private equity firms for multiples of eight to ten times earnings.” “The figures simply do not add up and furthermore, they suggest that underwriters are cherry-picking sections of the liability market. A great deal of work has yet to be done on occupiers’ liability and on legal costs, but reductions in awards levels have improved the risk profile of Irish businesses. We hope, and indeed expect, to see their business insurances fall promptly as a result.”