Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov has said Nato’s vocal support of Ukraine stands in the way of reaching a political deal to end the conflict. Some 1.02 million people have been evacuated from Ukraine into Russia since February 24th, Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov told the Xinhua news agency early on Saturday. That number includes 120,000 foreigners and people evacuated from Russian-backed breakaway regions of Ukraine, the so-called Donetsk and Luhansk People’s republics. Ukrainian forces have fought to hold off Russian attempts to advance in the south and east, where the Kremlin is seeking to capture the country’s industrial Donbas region. Meanwhile, a senior US defence official said Moscow’s offensive is going much slower than planned. While artillery fire, sirens and explosions were heard on Friday in some cities, the United Nations sought to broker an evacuation of civilians from the increasingly hellish ruins of Mariupol, where the mayor said the situation inside the steel plant that has become the southern port city’s last stronghold is dire. Citizens are “begging to get saved,” Mayor Vadym Boichenko said. “There, it’s not a matter of days. It’s a matter of hours.” Getting a full picture of the unfolding battle in the east has been difficult because airstrikes and artillery barrages have made it extremely dangerous for reporters to move around. Both Ukraine and the Moscow-backed rebels fighting in the east have also introduced tight restrictions on reporting from the combat zone. But so far, Russia’s troops and the separatist forces appear to have made only minor gains. In part because of the strength of Ukrainian resistance, the US believes the Russians are “at least several days behind where they wanted to be” as they try to encircle Ukrainian troops in the east, said the senior US defence official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. Mariupol As Russian troops try to move north out of Mariupol so they can advance on Ukrainian forces from the south, their progress has been “slow and uneven and certainly not decisive,” the official said. In the bombed-out city of Mariupol, around 100,000 people were believed trapped with little food, water or medicine. An estimated 2,000 Ukrainian defenders and 1,000 civilians were holed up at the Azovstal steel plant. The Soviet-era steel plant has a vast underground network of bunkers able to withstand airstrikes. But the situation has grown more dire after the Russians dropped “bunker busters” and other bombs. “Locals who manage to leave Mariupol say it is hell, but when they leave this fortress, they say it is worse,” the mayor said. UN spokesman Farhan Haq said the organisation was negotiating with authorities in Moscow and Kyiv to create safe passage. This time, “we hope there’s a slight touch of humanity in the enemy,” the mayor said. Ukraine has blamed the failure of numerous previous evacuation attempts on continued Russian shelling. Mr Lavrov told Saudi-owned Al-Arabiya TV that the real problem is that “humanitarian corridors are being ignored by Ukrainian ultra-nationals”. Moscow has repeatedly claimed right-wing Ukrainians are thwarting evacuation efforts and using civilians as human shields. Fighting could be heard from Kramatorsk to Sloviansk, two cities about 11 miles apart in the Donbas. Columns of smoke rose from the Sloviansk area and neighbouring cities. At least one person was reported wounded in the shelling. In his nightly video address, Volodymyr Zelensky accused Russia of trying to destroy the Donbas and all who live there. The constant attacks “show that Russia wants to empty this territory of all people,” he said. “If the Russian invaders are able to realise their plans even partially, then they have enough artillery and aircraft to turn the entire Donbas into stones, as they did with Mariupol.” Ukrainian troops in the Luhansk region of the Donbas repulsed an attack by Russian airborne troops and killed most of their unit, the governor said. “Only seven of the invaders survived,” governor Serhiy Haidai said on Friday on Telegram. The claim could not immediately be confirmed. He did not say where the attack took place but said Russian forces were preparing for an attack on Severodonetsk. In a neighbourhood on the outskirts of Kharkiv that is regularly shelled by Russian forces, some residents remain in their apartments, even though the buildings have charred gaping holes. There is no running water or electricity so they gather outside to cook on an open flame. In the nearby village of Ruska Lozava, hundreds of people were evacuated after Ukrainian forces retook the city from Russian occupiers, according to the regional governor. Those who fled to Kharkiv spoke of dire conditions under the Russians, with little water or food and no electricity. “We were hiding in the basement. It was horror. The basement was shaking from the explosions. We were screaming, we were crying and we were praying to God,” said Ludmila Bocharnikova. Former US Marine Willy Joseph Cancel (22) was killed on Monday while working for a military contracting company that sent him to Ukraine, his mother, Rebecca Cabrera, told CNN. At least two others fighting on the Ukrainian side, one from Britain and the other from Denmark, have also been killed. — Associated Press with additional reporting by Reuters