Richard Barrett’s property group Bartra is planning a five-storey, 39-unit, build-to-rent apartment scheme for Blackrock in south Dublin aimed at older people, complete with two roof-top hot tubs. In the plans lodged for Woodlands Park with Dún Laoghaire Rathdown County Council, a planning consultant for Bartra Property Ltd said the concept was “to provide high-quality, specialist, age-appropriate housing for older people close to their existing communities, promoting vibrant retirement communities where people can enjoy a healthier and more active retirement”. Scheme The scheme – comprising 35 one-bedroom units and four two-bedroom units – also includes a Trackman golf simulator room for enthusiasts. The proposed scheme’s other residential facilities include a cinema, meeting room/family dining room, library/reading area, gym, kitchen, hydrotherapy room, hairdressing room, massage facilities and private member’s club room with espresso bar. The site is located 450m from the junction connecting the N11 and the N31 and a 20-minute walk from the centre of Blackrock and Stillorgan. Planning consultant Kevin Hughes of Hughes Planning & Development Consultants said that “social interaction is important. But perhaps more than ever later in life and the proposed development scheme . . . promotes healthy living and wellbeing”. In a submission, Mr Hughes said “the goal is to create a close-knit community through shared spaces, lounges and amenity areas and to fundamentally change the way retirement housing is understood and delivered”. Opportunity Mr Hughes added that “additionally, by providing people with the opportunity to downsize – or rightsize – to appropriate accommodation . . . has the effect of freeing up under-occupied existing housing stock”. The planning submission stated that the proposed apartments and ancillary amenity facilities “will create a warm and friendly community that will provide safe accommodation for its residents”. Arguing the need for such developments, the planning submission noted that Trinity College Dublin’s 2017 Irish longitudinal study on ageing stated that by 2030 one in five people living in the State will be 65 years or older. The council is due to make a decision on the proposed Blackrock scheme in May.