Dublin City Council has rejected key features of planned changes to the facade for the rebranded 3Olympia. Earlier this year, Denis Desmond’s and Caroline Downey’s Olympia Productions Unlimited lodged plans with Dublin City Council for an overhaul of the exterior of the 3Olympia Theatre on Dame Street. This was five months after the venue was renamed as the 3Olympia Theatre in an eight-year sponsorship deal with the telecoms group 3 Ireland. Last September, Caroline Downey said the sponsorship deal would allow the venue to survive following 18 months of closures during the Covid-19 pandemic. The overhaul involved is a large art deco arch that would have 3Olympia on each side and the revamp also included three LED advertising screens. The proposal also included the theatre’s distinctive red painted exterior being changed to grey. However, Olympia Productions must now lodge revised plans for what is proposed and the red painted exterior may yet be retained after the council’s conservation officer stated that “the proposed new painting scheme is not supported”. Reservations The council planner’s report concluded that “there are some reservations regarding the loss of the distinctive theatre red colour to the front elevation”. “A more muted colour is proposed, however it may be the case that the retention of the traditional red colour may be more appropriate.” As a result, the council has told the 3Olympia company to provide a new paint scheme to be based on careful analysis of the existing paint on the façade. The council has also told Olympia Productions that the new plans should omit the planned art deco arch and the three advertising screens. The council stated that “the scale of the arch is likely to have a detrimental impact on the subject site and the streetscape” and instead of the arch, the company has been asked to submit plans for a smaller projecting sign. Planning consultant for Olympia Productions, John Spain & Associates, told the council that the proposals would “provide a high quality facade to Dame Street which constitutes a vast improvement to the current frontage both in terms of palette and materials used and architectural style and quality”. Two individuals objected to the changes. Dr Laura Heavey from Drumcondra stated that what was proposed would “irreparably” change the distinct character of the building. She added that the “red colour on the facade is what gives the building its iconic character”. Emma Wyse from off Cork Street, Dublin 8, asked the council to “not allow the Olympia’s vibrant red colour to be painted over”.