Scottie Scheffler - Odds: 14-1 Since he learned the art of winning, there has been no stopping the 6ft 3in American who has moved to world number one. The hot streak started with a breakthrough PGA Tour win in the Phoenix Open followed by another at the Arnold Palmer Invitational and then another at the WGC-Dell Technologies. Three wins on three totally different course set-ups showcasespearances at Augusta. Formguide: 1-7-1-55-1 Louis Oosthuizen - 33-1 Like a volcano waiting to explode, there is something about the Springbok that is ready to ignite. Hasn’t won since his South African Open win in 2018 but had six top-10s globally last year and has been consistent without setting the world on fire in his five appearances so far this year. Runner-up all of 10 years ago, his best performance, Oosthuizen hasn’t missed a cut at the Masters since 2013.  Formguide: 14-30-42-62-35 Shane Lowry - 25-1 The wonder is why Lowry hasn’t done better in past Masters, with a best finish of tied-21st last year. He’s better than that. His short game is as good as anyone’s and the only question mark is often with putter in hand, but that has behaved in recent months and he has mapped out a really good schedule up to this latest Masters bid and is trending in the right direction for a really good crack at acquiring a green jacket. Formguide: 14-2-13-12-35 Matt Fitzpatrick - 40-1 Throw away that missed cut from The Players where he was more affected than most by the weather and this has been an exceptionally solid year to date for the Englishman, who leads the stroke gained statistic on the PGA Tour and who has garnered three top-10s in his last five appearances. One of those who prefers to leave the flagstick in when putting, Fitzpatrick – with a best of tied-seventh at the 2016 Masters – has enough experience of Augusta National at this stage to be a real contender this time.  Formguide: 10-9-MC-5-18 Talor Gooch - 66-1 If there is a tendency to blow hot and cold, Gooch – a winner of the RSM Classic late last year – has nevertheless shown a real improvement in his all-round game. Making his Masters debut, Gooch will hope that for a good week with the driver (which tends to be his Achilles heel on occasion) and that the rest of his game (and his head) is in a good place.  Formguide: 26-MC-7-MC-18