Munster 26 Exeter Chiefs 10 (Munster win 34-23 on aggregate) As another Euro epic unfolded and their 16th man was in full voice, the watching two-time Lions captain Sam Warburton was a little mystified as to why there appeared to be so much negativity around Munster this season. Rob Baxter, the Exeter director of rugby who has brought such sustained success to the Chiefs over the last 13 years, could both share Warburton’s view and identify with the outside noise around Munster. Ever polite and engaging, without recourse to excuses such as missing four British & Irish Lions through injury on the premise that every squad has injuries, Baxter’s respect for Munster remained undimmed. “Ah look, I think it’s a fantastic place to play rugby. I think outside of the result, and we’ve lost here twice now, our players and our supporters enjoy coming to the city and they enjoy the games. So from our perspective it’s a great place to play rugby. Obviously from everybody else’s perspective, everything changes. “Munster are a little like us. Once you win things it’s never good enough to not win them again. I’m feeling that now. We won the Heineken Cup and it never feels good enough to not win it again. The same with Premierships, once you’ve won them it never feels good if you don’t win them again, and that’s probably where Munster are.” Ne’er a truer word. Had Munster lost here it could have made for a grim endgame to Johann van Graan’s five seasons at the helm, and that of Stephen Larkham and JP Ferreira too, and even more disaffection. But perhaps now that outside noise might quieten a tad. Now, instead of being forced to watch the quarter-finals from the outside for the third campaign in a row, Munster can press on with their URC campaign away to Ulster next Friday before hosting Cardiff in Musgrave Park seven nights later, while eagerly awaiting the visit of Toulouse to the Aviva Stadium in three weeks’ time. This win now gives his side “massive momentum,” Johann van Graan admitted, in the knowledge that Munster have secured a place in the quarter-finals for a 19th time. “This club loves Europe and European rugby on a Saturday afternoon in Thomond Park is special, and you could feel that out there.” For all the outside noise, all the vibes from within have suggested that if anything, the myriad difficulties and distractions as well as criticism they have endured this season have tightened their sense of unity. Exeter threw the kitchen sink at them over this absorbing two-legged tie, which was compelling from first to the 160th minute and in doubt almost to the end. Munster had to make 213 tackles to Exeter’s 104. The outstanding Jack O’Donoghue leading the way (as he also did in carries) along with John Ryan on 21 tackles, with all eight forwards, Carbery and both midfielders in double figures. Munster also rectified their first phase defence and were clinical in winning eight turnovers, as Peter O’Mahony, leading from the front in typical fashion, led the way with three. Kicking Woes Having problem solved at half-time in the first leg, especially at the breakdown, their game plan was superior and certainly better equipped towards cup rugby. Exeter scored four tries to Munster’s three over the two legs, yet missed all four conversions and took only one penalty at goal - missing from halfway with the last kick of the half while turning down about ten shots at goal. By contrast, with Joey Carbery landing six from six here in a 21-point haul, Munster opted for, and landed, five penalties over two games as well as landing two of three conversions. Munster also played the clock into the first-half wind and kicked both more often and far better as Conor Murray and the sublime Carbery - in possibly his finest performance here - oozed calm. That said, they had to remain collectively calm when Murray was binned after Sam Maunder’s 11th minute try and did so to such an extent that they actually won the ensuing ten minutes by 3-0 with Mike Haley filling in at scrumhalf, something which they had practiced in training. “I think we were a calm, composed team out there today. Nothing fazed us. In terms of messaging, this was knock-out rugby and knock-out rugby means you go 80 minutes. The card was pretty early in the game, around the 10th minute, so we kept our heads and very glad for the whole group that we came through.” After Carbery’s well-taken try, Munster remained composed following Jacques Vermeulen’s 50th minute try, putting Exeter back in front on aggregate. There had been better shape and handling skills in varying the point of attack through the phases and after two more Carbery penalties, O’Mahony put them on the front foot again by driving back Dave Ewers and Vermelen in quick succession. Munster’s sustained pressure then finally breached Exeter’s stout resistance when Damian de Allende powered through Henry Slade after Simon Zebo’s sleight of hand. So sleight it had to be seen again in slow motion for the crowd to gasp. Scoring sequence: 6 mins Carbery pen 3-0; 11 mins S Maunder try 3-5; 17 mins Carrbery pen 6-5; 26 mins Carbery try and con 13-5; (half-time 13-5); 49 mins Vermeulen try 13-10; 60 mins Carbery pen 16-10; 65 mins Carbery pen 19-10; 73 mins de Allende try, Carbery con 26-10. Munster: Mike Haley; Keith Earls, Chris Farrell, Damian de Allende, Simon Zebo; Joey Carbery, Conor Murray; Josh Wycherley, Niall Scannell, John Ryan; Jean Kleyn, Fineen Wycherley; Peter O’Mahony (C), John Hodnett, Jack O’Donoghue. Replacements: Diarmuid Barron for N Scannell, Jeremy Loughman for J Wycherley, Stephen Archer for Ryan (all 55 mins), Thomas Ahern for F Wycherley (61 mins), Craig Casey for Murray, Alex Kendellen for (both 69 mins), Jason Jenkins for (75 mins). Unused: Ben Healy. Exeter Chiefs: Stuart Hogg; Olly Woodburn, Henry Slade, Ian Whitten, Tom O’Flaherty; Joe Simmonds, Sam Maunder; Alec Hepburn, Jack Yeandle (capt), Harry Williams; Jonny Gray, Sam Skinner, Dave Ewers, Jannes Kirsten, Jacques Vermeulen. Replacements: Jack Maunder for S Maunder (58 mins), Jack Innard for Yeandle, Billy Keast for Hepburn, Patrick Schickerling for Williams (all 60 mins), Josh Hodge for (72 mins), Santiago Grondona for Whitten, Tom Gilbert-Hendrickson for Ewers (both 75 mins). Unused: Richard Capstick. Referee: Mathieu Raynal (France).