The European Centre for Disease Control (ECDC) and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) have concluded that it is too early to administer a second booster dose of a Covid-19 vaccine for the general population, but added that an extra dose may be given to those aged over 80. In a joint statement on Wednesday the European medical regulators said there is no clear evidence in the EU that vaccine protection against severe disease is waning, based on data from Israel. They said, based on current evidence, “a primary course of vaccination remains the most efficient way to limit the disease burden and impact of Covid-19”. The added that “for immunocompetent individuals below 60 years of age, the administration of a second booster dose is not supported by the available data on continued level of vaccine protection against severe disease or death.” However, they said for those over the age of 80, “due to the fragility of this population, the lower immune response to vaccination and the higher risk of severe Covid-19 a second booster could be administered”. They noted that data on safety and efficacy are only available for a fourth dose administered at least four months after a third dose, and this interval, together with local epidemiological data, should be taken into account when deciding on vaccination strategies. They said for those aged between 60 and 80 years that there was no “imment need” for a second booster. “For immunocompetent individuals between 60 and 80 years of age, there are currently no clear epidemiological signals from the European region of substantial waning of vaccine protection against severe COVID-19. “Therefore there is no indication of an imminent need for a second booster dose in this population.” They added that close monitoring of vaccine effectivenes is essential and a fourth dose may be considered for this age group. On Wednesday the National Immunisation Advisory Committee (Niac) approved a second booster of the vaccine to those aged over 65. It said that the extra dose can be given at least six months after the first, though this interval can be reduced to four months “for operational reasons”. Niac also recommended that a second booster, or fifth dose, be given to immunocompromised people aged 12 and older. A third booster will likely be needed for over-65s and the immunocomopromsied in the autumn, the committee advised, while provision of a second booster for the rest of the population is being kept under review.