The Republic of Ireland’s revised June fixtures for the Nations League group that includes Ukraine have been confirmed, and despite the Russian invasion Uefa have slated two matches in six days against Oleksandr Petrakov’s side. Ireland will host Ukraine at the Aviva stadium on June 8th with the return leg, previously suggested to take place in Poland, happening on Tuesday June 14th. The venue has yet to be decided. This follows the rescheduling of the World Cup playoff between Scotland and Ukraine at Hampden Park to June 1st with the winner facing Wales in Cardiff four days later. The victor of that playoff final lands into Group B alongside England, USA and Iran at the first ever winter World Cup in November. Either Ukraine or Scotland will be using competitive matches against a Stephen Kenny squad that is expected to be without injured duo Matt Doherty and Adam Idah, as preparation for the tournament in Qatar as Scotland also comes to Dublin on June 11th. The rejigged fixture list sees Ireland off to Yerevan for their opening Nations League B1 games, now against Armenia on June 4th. All told Kenny’s improving young side will play four important ties in just 10 days this summer with taxing trips either end of the schedule. The final two matches of a competition Kenny is on record stating Ireland can win outright, are away to Scotland and home to Armenia in September. The FAI will expect to sell out the Aviva stadium for Ukraine and Scotland games in June despite there only being a three-day gap between each visit. Kick-off times for all matches have yet to be agreed by broadcasters and associations. “We held very productive and amicable talks with Uefa, Fifa and our fellow associations this week and we are delighted to accommodate our colleagues in Ukraine with this rescheduling,” said FAI chief executive Jonathan Hill. “The FAI and European football stand with the people of Ukraine and we look forward to welcoming them to Dublin on June 8th.” Earlier this week, FAI president Gerry McAnaney wrote to all member clubs and leagues with details of the Government’s request to use of sports halls and clubhouses as temporary accommodation for Ukrainian refugees over the next two months. “The situation is quite drastic for the next eight weeks or so until other State bodies and various institutions can release accommodation spaces,” said McAnaney. “As an association we acknowledge that [this request] from Government will not be feasible for many of our clubs but there are so many other ways that Irish football can help. “Members may consider acting as host families for our visitors from Ukraine in this period, members may have access to residential or non-residential units that can help with this short-term crisis or they may know somebody who can help with accommodation. Every little bit will make a difference in this situation. “We are due to play Ukraine in the Uefa Nations League in June so let’s continue to show solidarity with our friends from Ukraine between now and then.” Revised Republic of Ireland Uefa Nations League Fixtures Saturday, June 4th: Armenia v Republic of Ireland Wednesday, June 8th: Republic of Ireland v Ukraine Saturday, June 11th: Republic of Ireland v Scotland Tuesday, June 14th: Ukraine v Republic of Ireland Saturday, September 24th: Scotland v Republic of Ireland Tuesday, September 27th: Republic of Ireland v Armenia