Apart from foundation, mascara is the product that I receive most emails and direct messages about from readers. “Which one will actually stay put?” “What’s a tubing mascara and do I need one?” “Which mascara is the right one for my wedding day?” The first column each month takes us back to basics, and I draft in an expert to share their advice and experience. This week, Brown Thomas beauty stylist Aidan Corcoran shares his wealth of knowledge and experience as a makeup artist to help demystify most people’s desert island product. The most common question he is asked? “Clients always ask how to stop mascara from running,” says Corcoran. “Even the most lauded mascaras can sometimes give fallout. I’ll always try to tailor the mascara to the client’s lashes – shorter, thicker eyelashes lend themselves better to a lengthening formula. By doing this you can help stop the double printing effect on the skin clients sometimes get. Using a thicker wand and volumising formula on lashes that are already thick can just lead to them being too thick with product.” If you are confused by the difference between a smudgeproof and waterproof mascara, Corcoran says “a waterproof formula will last all day against humidity and happy bridal tears! Smudgeproof means it’s very resistant against moving on your skin throughout the day. But if you don’t tailor the mascara to the lashes, smudgeproof suddenly doesn’t seem as smudgeproof!” For those who find removing mascara stressful and tough on the eyes, he recommends a tubing mascara, which coats each lash and then slips off almost like a glove when you cleanse. “This type of formula gives such a gorgeous naturally full effect to a lash”, advises Corcoran. It’s perfect for anyone who either wants a day-to-day lash result or someone who is already blessed with lots of full lashes! Hourglass do a gorgeous tubing mascara.” He advises people to shop for the lashes they have as much as the lashes they want and to put a little time into the application in order to build a curated lash look. “One top tip I always tell everyone is to make sure they get the lash formula right into the root of the lashes. Mascaras are designed to lift from the root. It’s so important to get the product right to the base so it can fully form a gorgeous lifting curl.” If you are a fully fledged member of the brown mascara brigade, it’s losing its slightly drab image and making a comeback. “I’ll always have room in my makeup kit for a brown mascara ... it can be beautifully soft on softer hair tones or when I’m doing a fuller lip look.” TRY Mac Stack Mascara Micro Brush (€29 at Brown Thomas) Benefit BADgal BANG! Waterproof in Xtra Black or Xtra Brown (€25 at cultbeauty.com) Charlotte Tilbury Pillow Talk Push Up Lashes in Dream Pop (€29 at charlottetilbury.com) Sculpted by Aimee Connolly My Mascara (€19 at sculptedbyaimee.com) Product of the Week Simple Supercharged Booster Serum (€11 at pharmacies nationwide)