Irish political parties are not doing enough when it comes to supporting women who are subject to online abuse and threats, a new report suggests. The document, developed on behalf of the National Women’s Council of Ireland (NWC), has called for “substantial action” to better support women political candidates. The NWC is on Thursday publishing a social media toolkit for parties to tackle violence against women in politics. The toolkit, developed by Dr Valesca Lima and Claire McGing, is based on an analysis of information provided by the political parties, including an electronic survey completed by party members, election candidates and office-holders on how the parties deal with online abuse of female party members. Seven parties responded to the survey: Fine Gael, Fianna Fáil, Sinn Féin, Labour Party, Social Democrats, and PBP-Solidarity. According to the report, the survey results “suggest that most constitutions and internal party codes still do not cover the various types of abuse that women in politics face online”. Orla O’Connor, director of the NWC, said women in public life are regularly subjected to “often unrelenting abuse, particularly online”. Ms O’Connor described the situation as “completely unacceptable”, adding there is a “clear obligation” on political parties to take the issue seriously. The toolkit makes a number of recommendations, including the creation of a joint code on political conduct which outlines the minimum standards of behaviour expected from all party members, and to fund equality officer roles at constituency and branch levels. Other recommendations include the provision of mental health services to women who have been targeted by abuse, the training of designated contact persons to deal with cases and creating an anonymous reporting tool for all party members. Sue Moore, chief executive of the Jo Cox Foundation, delivered a video message of support for the toolkit at the launch. “We know that one of the main issues stopping more women getting involved in politics, and causing women in politics to step back, is this problem of abuse and intimidation,” she said. “That’s why we welcome NWC’s report and concrete suggestions… to bring about change.”