Russian forces are being pushed back around Kyiv but fighting is still fierce in some areas near Ukraine’s capital, Ukrainian officials said on Friday. Russia said during negotiations on Tuesday that it would scale down operations in the Kyiv and Chernihiv regions, both of which are in northern Ukraine, but officials in both regions say fighting has continued in some areas. Reuters was unable to verify the information about military movements or fighting in Ukraine. Nato Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg has said Russian forces are not withdrawing but regrouping, and Ukrainian officials say Russian troops are losing ground rather than retreating of their own accord. “Our troops are chasing them both to the northwest and northeast (of Kyiv), pushing the enemy away from Kyiv,” said Oleksiy Arestovych, a political adviser to Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy. Mr Arestovych said Russia was carrying out a partial troop rotation and sending some of its forces to fight in eastern Ukraine. The Kyiv region’s governor, Oleksandr Pavlyuk, wrote on the Telegram messaging app earlier on Friday that some Russian troops had moved back and were heading towards the border with Belarus, a Russian ally. He said Russian forces had left the village of Hostomel, which is next to an important airport, but were digging in at the town of Bucha. Mayor Vitaliy Klitschko later urged residents not to head back to Kyiv yet because “huge” battles were being fought to the north and east of the capital. He did not indicate that these were new battles. Helicopters Earlier, Russia accused Ukraine of sending attack helicopters across the border to strike an oil storage facility in what would be the first raid on Russian soil since the outbreak of the war, if confirmed. Ukraine has not confirmed that it launched the attack, raising questions about whether Russian negligence may be to blame. A Russian governor in the border region of Belgorod said that early on Friday two Ukrainian Mi-24 helicopters crossed the border at low altitude before firing rockets at an oil facility some 40km from the border. InteractiveVideo posted to social media on Friday appeared to show a helicopter strike using air-to-ground missiles and then a major fire at the facility said to be in Belgorod, with flames reaching dozens of metres into the air. Reports showed that the facility continued to burn until midday on Friday, with dozens of firefighters dispatched to battle the inferno. Other videos showed the helicopters, which are used by both Ukraine and Russia, flying in the region. “The fire at the oil depot occurred as a result of an airstrike from two helicopters of the armed forces of Ukraine, which entered the territory of Russia at low altitude,” said governor Vyacheslav Gladkov. “There are no victims.” An explosion also took place earlier on Thursday at the site of an arms depot in Belgorod, raising speculation that saboteurs were targeting the city, which has served as a major hub for Russian military units involved in the invasion of Ukraine. The Russian news agency Tass reported that four servicemen were injured due to that explosion. The explosions in the Russian rear came after Russia announced it was winding down its offensive toward Kyiv after its troops met heavy resistance in the month-long war. Western officials have warned that Russia may be repositioning its troops for a larger attack on Ukraine’s east. Gas Russian gas was still flowing to Europe on Friday despite a deadline set by president Vladimir Putin to cut it off unless customers pay in roubles, Moscow’s strongest threat to retaliate for sanctions imposed over its invasion of Ukraine. Negotiations aimed at ending the war were set to resume by video link as Ukrainian forces made more advances on the ground in a counterattack that has repelled the Russians from Kyiv and broken the sieges of some cities in the north and east. After failing to capture a single major Ukrainian city in five weeks of war, Russia says it has shifted its focus to the southeast, where it has backed separatists since 2014. The area includes the port of Mariupol, scene of the war’s worst humanitarian emergency, where the United Nations believes thousands of people have died after more than a month under Russian siege and relentless bombardment. The Red Cross had hoped to begin evacuations from the city on Friday but Ukraine said Russia had prevent buses from reaching the city on Thursday. Western sanctions imposed over the war have cut off Russia from much of world trade, but exceptions have been carved out for oil and gas. Mr Putin signed an order setting a Friday deadline for buyers from “unfriendly” countries to pay for gas using roubles or be cut off, a demand western customers have rejected as an attempt to rewrite contracts that call for payment in euros. Germany, the biggest buyer, called it “blackmail”, and had warned this week of a potential emergency if supplies were curtailed. Steady flows But there was no sign on Friday of an immediate interruption. Flows remained steady through two of the three main pipelines bringing Russian gas into Europe - Nord Stream 1 across the Baltic Sea, and into Slovakia over Ukraine. Flows through the other main route, the Yamal-Europe pipeline over Belarus, had reversed direction, now bringing gas from Germany to Poland, but this occurs occasionally and did not necessarily indicate a new policy. Gazprom, Russia’s state-owned gas giant, said it was continuing to supply Europe via Ukraine in line with requests from consumers that were down only fractionally from Thursday. A source had said that some contracts involved gas being delivered before payments were due, suggesting the taps might not be turned off immediately. Mr Putin sent troops on February 24th for what he calls a “special military operation” to demilitarise Ukraine. Western countries call it an unprovoked war of aggression and say Mr Putin’s real aim was to topple Ukraine’s government in a campaign that has so far failed, due to strong Ukrainian resistance and poor Russian logistics. Irpin, a commuter suburb northwest of Kyiv that had been one of the main battlegrounds for weeks, was now firmly back in Ukrainian hands, a wasteland littered with burnt-out tanks. Volunteers and emergency workers were carrying the dead on stretchers out of the rubble. About a dozen bodies were zipped up in black plastic body bags, lined up on a street and loaded into vans. ‘Afraid to leave’ Lilia Ristich was sitting on a metal playground swing with her young son Artur. Most people had fled; they had stayed. “We were afraid to leave because they were shooting all the time, from the very first day. It was horrible when our house was hit. It was horrible,” she said. She listed off neighbours who had been killed - the man “buried there, on the lawn”; the couple with their 12-year-old child, all burned alive. “When our army came then I fully understood we had been liberated. It was happiness beyond imagination. I pray for all this to end and for them never to come back,” she said. “When you hold a child in your arms it is an everlasting fear.” Over the past 10 days, Ukrainian forces have recaptured suburbs near Kyiv, broken the siege of Sumy in the east and driven back Russian forces advancing on Mykolaiv in the south. Regarding the latest Ukrainian advance, Britain’s Ministry of Defence said on Friday that Ukrainian forces had recaptured villages linking Kyiv with the besieged northern city of Chernihiv. At talks this week, Moscow said it would reduce offensives near Kyiv and Chernihiv to build trust at peace talks. Kyiv and its allies say Russia is pulling troops out in those areas, not as a goodwill gesture but to regroup, because they have taken heavy losses. The Russians are still bombarding cities even as they pull out, and could be preparing a major new assault in the southeast, where they say they want to “liberate” the Donbas region claimed by the separatists, including Mariupol. – Guardian/Reuters