US property firm Kennedy Wilson and its joint-venture partner Nama have signed a deal with global fintech and payments provider Fiserv for all 68,300sq ft of the office space at Ten Hanover Quay in Dublin’s south docklands. The company has committed to occupy the property on a 15-year lease with a tenant break option in year 12. While the rent has not been disclosed by the landlord, The Irish Times understands Fiserv has agreed to pay between €55 and €60 per sq ft for the property. Located on the waterfront at Kennedy Wilson’s Capital Dock mixed-use scheme, Ten Hanover Quay comprises seven floors of office accommodation housed within a former warehouse and stables dating from the 1780s. Following its acquisition of the site in 2017, Kennedy Wilson and its partners engaged OMP and Mola Architecture, and contractors John Sisk & Son to transform the property into a modern office building with a rooftop terrace and best-in-class conservation features. As a Class-A industrial warehouse office redevelopment, the property comes with leading sustainability credentials including gold certifications across LEED, WELL and WiredScore, along with place-making and community engagement. As part of the redevelopment project Kennedy Wilson also refurbished and extended the historic Lock Keeper’s Cottage, which is earmarked for community use, and commissioned the Sentinel, a 40-foot limestone sculpture by the renowned artist Michael Warren to anchor the public realm. Fiserv has a long history here in Ireland, with more than 400 people employed at its existing offices in the south Dublin suburb of Clonskeagh, and a further 200 people at its technology centre in Nenagh, Co Tipperary. Its Dublin-based workforce will transfer to its new office at Ten Hanover Quay later this year, while the company has plans to grow its overall Irish workforce by 300. Fiserv operates in more than 100 countries, with a customer base made up of nearly 10,000 financial institutions. Here in Irelandit operates a joint venture with AIB, AIB Merchant Services (AIBMS), one of Ireland’s largest payment-solution providers and one of Europe’s largest e-commerce acquirers. Dynamic hub Commenting on his company’s decision to locate at Ten Hanover Quay, John Gibbons, head of EMEA at Fiserv, said: “Our new location will be a key part of our presence in EMEA, serving as a destination for talent that brings people together in a dynamic hub of collaboration and innovation as we move payments and financial services forward.” Ali Rohan, head of Ireland at Kennedy Wilson, said: “We are very excited to lease Ten Hanover Quay, completing our cutting-edge Capital Dock campus. The financial and tech sectors are well represented around the docklands and have furthered demand for intelligent buildings that enable collaboration, connectivity, and occupier wellbeing.” The overall Capital Dock campus extends to 5.3-acres and comprises 460,000sq ft of fully occupied offices; 190 high-end residential units that are currently 92 per cent occupied; 2.5-acres of public space, 27,000sq ft of restaurant, bar, and food offerings, including Dublin’s flagship Brewdog Outpost, Fresh the Good Food Market, and a new waterside park and playground.