The deputy foreign editor of The Irish Times, David McKechnie, has died unexpectedly. Mr McKechnie, aged 45, fell ill last week and was brought to the Mater Hospital in Dublin, where he died on Tuesday afternoon. His death has been greeted with sadness and grief by colleagues in the newspaper. Paying tribute, Editor Paul O’Neill said: “As deputy foreign editor, Dave helped to make The Irish Times what it is, not least in recent weeks when he played a leading part in overseeing coverage of events in Ukraine. He was hugely invested in the role, combining his deep interest in world affairs with an inquiring mind, attention to detail and a strong work ethic. “He was known for his warm and understated demeanour and his calm and measured approach which endeared him to colleagues, many of whom became his friends. His loss is deeply felt by all in The Irish Times. We extend our deepest sympathy to his wife, Lilian, and his family.” Outstanding journalist The Irish Times foreign editor, Chris Dooley, said Mr McKechnie was an outstanding journalist who was also a great friend to himself and many other colleagues. “Dave really was the best of us and it is impossible to imagine he will not be with us anymore. “Great writers don’t always make great editors but Dave was an exception. He had unerring news judgement and his calm demeanour and wry sense of humour made him a joy to work with. His loss to us is incalculable, both professionally and personally.” In addition to working as deputy foreign editor, he reported for The Irish Times from Colombia, Brazil and Bangladesh on events such as the Colombian peace process, the Rohingya refugee crisis and the Fifa World Cup. Educated at Ardscoil Rís secondary school on Griffith Avenue in Dublin, Mr McKechnie studied journalism in the Dublin Institute of Technology and later completed a BA in art history and English and a master’s degree in American literature in UCD. He worked between 1996 and 1999 for the Sunday Tribune as a sports writer, primarily covering football. He later served for a year as the Sunday Tribune’s UK-based football correspondent. Later, he worked as a production editor for the Sunday Times and the Guardian. Details of funeral arrangements for Mr McKechnie, who donated his organs, have yet to be confirmed.