British prime minister Boris Johnson and chancellor Rishi Sunak have been issued with fines as part of an investigation by the Metropolitan Police into breaches of Covid-19 rules in Downing Street and Whitehall during the pandemic. The force said on Tuesday that more than 50 fines had been issued. Downing Street later confirmed that Mr Johnson and Mr Sunak were among those hit with fixed-penalty notices. Mr Johnson paid the fine and offered a “full apology” for the breaches at his birthday gathering in 2020. He said it “did not occur” to him that the gathering in the Cabinet Room in June two years ago was a violation of the rules but that after being issued with a fine he “now humbly accepts” he did breach Covid-19 laws. The prime minister, speaking to broadcasters at Chequers, said he “fully respects” the outcome of the police investigation and that he accepted “in all sincerity that people had the right to expect better” from him. Asked if he thought more fines were coming his way, he said the media would be among the first to know. Carrie Johnson, the prime minister’s wife, was also fined. A spokesperson for Mrs Johnson said she had paid the fine, which is understood to have been £50 if settled within 14 days. Mr Sunak has yet to comment since his fine was confirmed. The first tranche of 20 fixed-penalty notices were issued last month as part of the Met’s Operation Hillman inquiry, which began in January in response to reports of numerous gatherings throughout Westminster during Covid-19 lockdowns in 2020 and 2021. The fines are likely to reignite concerns over Mr Johnson’s leadership among Tory MPs and opposition parties with just weeks to go before the May local elections. The Acro Criminal Records Office is expected to issue the latest set of penalty notices after the referral. Individuals who receive a notice can either pay a fine or challenge it in the courts. “The investigation into allegations of breaches of Covid-19 regulations in Whitehall and Downing Street continues to progress,” the Met said in a statement. “As of Tuesday, April 12th, 2022, we have made over 50 referrals for fixed penalty notices to the Acro Criminal Records Office for breaches of Covid-19 regulations.” Opposition MPs raised questions over whether the prime minister could be trusted to lead the country. Labour Party leader Sir Keir Starmer said both Mr Johnson and Mr Sunak should quit. Sir Keir said: “Boris Johnson and Rishi Sunak have broken the law and repeatedly lied to the British public. “They must both resign. The Conservatives are totally unfit to govern. Britain deserves better.” Sir Ed Davey, leader of the Liberal Democrats, said:“The police have now completely shredded Johnson’s claims that no laws were broken. “He cannot be trusted and cannot continue as prime minister . . . no other leader in any other organisation would be allowed to continue after lawbreaking on this scale.” As part of the police investigation into the 12 gatherings across Whitehall, more than 100 questionnaires were sent to individuals suspected of organising or attending rule-breaking events, including Mr Johnson, Mr Sunak and Simon Case. The Met’s investigation into “partygate” is running in parallel with an internal Whitehall investigation by Sue Gray, a veteran adjudicator and civil servant. Her initial findings were published earlier this year, with the full investigation due when the Met concludes its inquiries. – Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2022/Additional reporting: PA