Strict US Covid border entry rules, which require all travellers to test negative before boarding flights to the US, could damage the recovery in the Irish tourism industry this year, Fáilte Ireland has warned. Mark Paul has the details. It’s not the only bad news. Business advisers PwC warn that Ireland is facing a dramatic increase in insolvencies and business restructuring later this year and next. The warning comes even as new data shows that insolvencies have jumped by almost a fifth in the past year. However, they are still well below “normal” numbers. In his column, Eoin Burke-Kennedy asks whether the current energy crisis in Europe, which is forcing countries to turn to fossil fuel energy sources only recently shunned, will slow down the transition to renewables or accelerate it? A survey across 20 countries shows Irish people are the most “crypto curious”, according to a report paid for by the Gemini cryptocurrency exchange, which is run by the billionaire Winklevoss twins from the United States. Even though fewer than one in five people has actually invested in cryptocurrencies, close to three in five said they were interested in doing so or learning more about it. Building materials group Grafton wants the High Court to set aside a decision by An Bord Pleanála (ABP) to allow a proposed new biogas facility in Offaly that would turn silage, manure and chicken litter into gas to heat homes and businesses. A horseracing venture set up by former professional rugby player Johne Murphy with trainer Joseph O’Brien is attracting increasing international interest, writes Barry O’Halloran. Murphy’s Thoroughbred Racing Syndicates buys young horses with a view to selling them on after a first racing season. Any ambitions to deliver renewable energy at scale will require the ability to store the energy they deliver in peak periods for use on the grid when the wind is not blowing or the sun shining, writes Corre Energy’s Patrick McClughan. Finally, Pilita Clark meets the US academic who inadvertently created the phrase of the post-pandemic workplace, the Great Resignation, and finds out what he thinks now about workplace intentions... as he moves jobs. Stay up to date with all our business news: sign up to our business news alerts and our Business Today daily email news digest.