Edinburgh 10 Ulster 16 Ulster continued their dominance over Edinburgh after inflicting yet another defeat on the Scottish capital side from a performance that had its emphasis on a grinding defence that gave the Scots little chance to play with the flamboyant style that has been their hallmark this season. The result ended Edinburgh’s unbeaten record at the Dam Stadium but it could have been otherwise had the hosts not waited until the last quarter to come back into a game that for the most part looked to be safely in the hands of Ulster. The visitors led 13-3 at half-time after recovering from a dynamic start by Edinburgh to score their only try of the game that came from a series of advances up the touchline as the hosts doled out penalty after penalty. Then once in the red zone the Ulster forwards, despite being without the sinbinned Nick Timoney, turned on the power with ferocious mauling and and powerful surges to the line ultimately creating space on the right for replacement Stewart Moore to deliver a sublime scoring pass to Rob Baloucoune Nathan Doak converted from the touchline before adding two penalties, Edinburgh’s only response a penalty goal in first-half stoppage-time by Emiliano Boffelli. Edinburgh’s propensity to give away penalties cost the home side another three points when Doak goaled yet again. Edinburgh finally woke up to the task ahead of them by turning up the heat, pressure on the Ulster line resulting in a yellow card for replacement Alan O’Connor but not even the man advantage could change the scoreline for Edinburgh. Finally, however, Edinburgh challenged the ruthless Ulster defence when Mark Bennett chipped the ball ahead before winning the race for the touchdown. Boffelli converted and Edinburgh were in sight of a comeback. But it was not to be despite a frantic effort by Edinburgh in the closing minutes leaving Ulster winners at the end of a titanic struggle. EDINBURGH: J van der Walt; D Hoyland, M Bennett, J Lang, E Boffelli; B Kinghorn, B Vellacott; P Schoeman, S McInally, W Nel; J Hodgson, G Gilchrist (capt); L Crosbie, H Watson, M Bradbury. Replacements: C Dean for Lang (3 mins), D Cherry for McInally (8), B Muncaster for Crosbie (49), H Pyrgos for Vellacott (58), L Atalifo for Nel (60), P Phillips for Hodgson (62). Not used: H Courtney. ULSTER: M Lowry; R Baloucoune, J Hume, S McCloskey, E McIlroy; W Burns, N Doak; A Warwick , R Herring, G Milasinovich; K Treadwell, I Henderson (capt); M Rea, N Timoney, D Vermeulen. Replacements: A O’Connor for Henderson (6 mins), S Moore for McCloskey (7), E O’Sullivan for Warwick (49), J Cooney for Doak (50), R Lyttle for Lowry (58), R Kane for Milasinovich (60), B Roberts for Herring (66). Referee: B Whitehouse (Wales).