Gardai investigating the murders of Aidan Moffitt and Michael Snee in Sligo this week have charged the main suspect, who is set to appear before the courts on Thursday afternoon. The 22-year-old was detained in the town in the hours after Mr Snee’s body was found on Tuesday night. The suspect was taken for questioning to Sligo Garda station, where he was detained under the provisions of section 4 Criminal Justice Act 1984. He was charged this afternoon and is due to appear before Sligo District Court later. Investigators believe that the two deceased men met their killer online and are investigating if there was a homophobic motive to the attacks. Warm tributes have been paid to the two Mr Snee (58) and Fine Gael activist and auctioneer Mr Moffitt (41). The body of Mr Snee, a care assistant who had worked at St John’s Hospital and Nazareth House in Sligo, was discovered at his home in City View, a quiet development off Connaughton Road in the town. Cllr Gino O’Boyle said there was a sense of shock and disbelief throughout the town. “After the second murder I was getting calls at 2am, 3am and 4am from people asking if there had been an arrest. Sligo shut down in a way I have never seen before. People were very frightened,” he said. Mr O’Boyle said that while gardaí had done great work, and there was relief that a suspect had been arrested, “people will continue to look over their shoulder”. He also expressed concern that members of the gay community who are victims of homophobic attacks are still afraid to come forward because of the stigma. “I think there are a lot of crimes which are not being reported.” It is understood that gardaí believe that a man in his 40s, who was the victim of a serious assault in the racecourse area of Sligo town last weekend, may have had a lucky escape. Sources said that prior to the arrest, the man who is reported to have lost an eye after being stabbed in the face, was advised to leave his home for his own safety in the wake of the two murders. Taoiseach Micheál Martin and other Ministers have condemned the murders and the LGBT Ireland support service expressed shock and concern. Vigils for the two victims have been planned for Sligo, Dublin and several other locations in the State for Friday evening. Sligo Pride voiced shock and devastation at the murders. “Our condolences go out to the friends and families of the victims,” the group said in a statement. “We want them to know that we as a community are here for them, and we will not stand for this. Hate-based violence has no place in today’s society. “While we stress the importance of personal safety, we feel it is critical to emphasise that the problem lies with the perpetrators, not the victims. We have seen a disturbing increase in hate-based violence and harassment in Sligo in recent years.”