Consumers are being warned to be on their guard in the run-up to Easter as widely circulating scam messages tricked consumer sinto handing over personal details. In recent days, messages directing consumers to a bogus giveaway from Cadbury have circulated widely on social media and in WhatsApp groups, offering hampers of easter chocolate to participants. The messages directed users to a shortened web address. To claim their prize, winners were asked to register their details and inform a number of friends about the “giveaway”. However, Cadbury said it was not one of its promotions, and urged consumers not to interact with it or share details. “We’re aware of circulating posts on social media claiming to offer a free easter chocolate basket,” the company said. “We can confirm this has not been generated by us and we urge consumers not to interact with it or share any data. We’re working with the relevant organisations to ensure this is resolved.” The scam has appeared in a number of different forms in recent years, including fake competitions for SuperValu vouchers, free Aer Lingus tickets , and bogus Marks and Spencer voucher giveaways. Ian Porteous, regional director for security engineering in the UK and Ireland at security company Checkpoint, said it was unlikely to be the last such scam circulating in the coming days. “Cybercriminals are ruthless and will never pass on an opportunity to gain personal data. Unfortunately that includes public holidays, such as Easter, when many are wrapped up in the festivities,” he said. “This Cadbury WhatsApp scam isn’t the first and will likely not be the last as we run up to the Easter weekend.” Mr Porteous warned against falling for offers that seemed too good to be true, and offered a number of tips to help people identify potential scams, including misspelled domains, bad grammar or urgent requests for personal data. “If there is anything to suggest it may be not be authentic or there is just a niggling feeling then it is always best to visit the brands authorised social media handles or website directly to check the legitimacy of any promotions they may be running,” he said.