Sustainability can mean different things to different companies. It is the most urgent issue we face in modern times and can be difficult to measure due to its complexity and scope. Environmental Social Governance (ESG) provides a specific set of criteria that companies can benchmark and report against. ESG is vitally important because it now relates to internal practices and policies that lead to effective decision making which facilitates sustainable top-line growth. The growing impetus to ensure ESG standards are met by companies has introduced a whole new range of ideas, solutions and products that are changing the way we do business. This is the inaugural year of the ESG Awards and the event will take place on June 30th at The Mansion House, Dublin. The 2022 ESG Awards are a significant touchstone in the future of Irish business as the onus is put on firms to combat environmental, social and governance issues. The ESG Awards will celebrate the companies and individuals actively striving to address environmental, social and governance issues. Awards will showcase the successes of ESG initiatives, examples of best practice and highlight the importance of transparency in this area. The ESG Awards’ esteemed judging panel will adjudicate on all entries across a range of criteria and recognise those setting the standards for ESG Excellence. They will recognise and reward the best in class under 15 categories, while also choosing the best overall company and one outstanding individual demonstrating a commitment to sustainability and ESG. Having emerged from the global pandemic which stalled businesses and compelled them to improvise and adapt, environmental, social and governance issues are near the top of every company’s list. There has been a pivot away from the traditional barometers of success in businesses in recent years as companies must pour resources into making the necessary differences to combat ESG issues. The sustainability and ethical practices driving businesses are as important as the bottom line. These awards acknowledge those who are making a difference in each category while still thriving as a business. Categories for the event include ESG Company of the Year (Enterprise, SME & Start-up), Sustainable Supply Chain Award, Biodiversity Initiative Award, Net Zero Carbon Award, Energy Efficiency Initiative Award, Circular Economy Award, ESG Finance Award, ESG Investment Award, Climate Finance Initiative Award, Diversity & Inclusion Initiative, Social Responsibility Project, Employee Experience Award and the Good Governance Award. Two special awards will acknowledge the incredible work done by some of Ireland’s finest ESG leaders and advocates. The overall ESG Company Award, and the ESG Leader Award will be granted to sustainability champions to honour their contributions. The judging panel for the awards features some of Ireland’s environmental, social and governance champions: Faye Walsh Drouillard, founder, WakeUp Capital Faye founded WakeUp Capital in order to tackle the biggest challenges our generation faces, including sustainability. The organisation is a venture impact fund focused on sustainable and inclusive businesses. Faye has long been an activist for sustainable change and has been a driving force behind social and environmental development. Kathy Ryan, head of responsible investment, Irish Life Investment Before taking on the role at Irish Life Investment, Kathy worked at Aviva Investors as senior ESG product strategist, leading the ‘ESG Product Hub', and helping to evolve active ownership strategies in client solutions. Kathy founded Global Green Investments — ESG investment content, research and analytics firm — in 2013. Margot Slattery, global head of diversity & inclusion at ISS Margot joined ISS as their global group head of diversity & inclusion in May 2021 after a career where she worked her way up to senior management after starting out as a chef. At ISS, she is working with the board and executive to make ISS truly a global inclusion company in the workplace space. Margot hopes to further the diversity, inclusion and belonging agenda within and outside work ISS. She is also a member of different boards and NGOs to help advance the case for social and climate justice Anne Heraty, non-executive director, Cpl Anne Heraty built Cpl from the ground up over 31 years along with a group of her friends and colleagues. She is now on the board of Cpl’s parent company, Outsourcing INC, where she continues to pursue her passion for investing in and supporting Irish businesses. Anne became the first female chief executive of an Irish publicly quoted company at the turn of the millennium when she floated the company she co-founded with her husband. To align your company with the Business & Finance ESG Awards executive audience we have a limited number of partnership opportunities available. To find out more please contact brian.kearns@businessandfinance.com Please register your interest - businessandfinanceesgawards.com/#register-interest