Berlin is to step up heavy arms deliveries to Ukraine as delegates from more than 40 countries meet at the Ramstein US air force base in southern Germany. The gathering, called by US defence secretary Lloyd Austin, comes as Finland and Sweden have reportedly agreed in principle to make formal applications to join Nato. Opening the meeting, Mr Austin said “Ukraine’s valour and skill will go down in military history” and called on participants to step up their military contributions. “Ukraine has now beaten back the Russian military for 62 days,” he said. “Your resistance has brought inspiration to the free world and even greater resolve for Nato.” Ahead of the Ramstein meeting, attended by national defence ministers and Nato secretary general Jens Stoltenberg, a US official said Washington had supplied Kyiv with military equipment worth €3.2 billion since late February. On Monday, the US state department used an emergency declaration to approve the potential sale of $165 million worth of ammunition to Ukraine. In the same period, Berlin has resisted growing pressure to do more to deliver heavy arms to its eastern neighbour. On Tuesday, however, German defence minister Christine Lambrecht is expected to announce she will issue a permit for German arms company Krauss-Maffei Wegmann (KMW) to export about 50 Gepard anti-aircraft tanks to Ukraine. The vehicles need to be overhauled, the firm said, and it is unclear when they will be available for delivery. In addition, KMW is reportedly ready to supply 100 self-propelled Howitzer missile systems which can hit targets within 40km. The Netherlands has already announced it will provide similar equipment to the Ukrainian army. Another arms company, Rheinmetall has said it can supply Kyiv with 88 used Leopard tanks, including training and ammunition. The tanks were built in the 1960s and used by the German Bundeswehr armed forces until 2003. Ahead of the Ramstein meeting, Mr Austin stated the goal of western engagement is to ensure Ukraine “can win” the war against Russia and “weaken” the country to the point where it cannot repeat its invasion a second time. Russian foreign minister Sergei Lavrov described as an “illusion” the idea of anyone “wearing down the Russian army”. He told Russian state television that east-west tensions were worse now than during the Cuban missile crisis at the height of the cold war and warned that Moscow considers western arms shipments to Ukraine as legitimate targets for attack. “Nato, in essence, is engaged in a war with Russia through a proxy and is arming that proxy. War means war,” he said. Asked about the possibility of nuclear war, Mr Lavrov said: “The risks are very significant. I do not want the danger to be artificially inflated [but]it is serious, real. It cannot be underestimated.” Ukraine’s foreign minister Dmytro Kuleba suggested after the Lavrov interview that “Moscow senses defeat” and had lost its “last hope to scare the world off supporting Ukraine”. Mr Kuleba has pressed UN secretary general Antonio Guterres to use his meeting with Russian president Vladimir Putin later on Tuesday to press for an evacuation of Mariupol. An estimated 100,000 people are trapped in the port city while a contingent of Ukrainian fighters hold out against Russian forces at the Azovstal steel plant along with hundreds of civilians. Finnish and Swedish media have reported that both countries have decided in principle to file a joint application to join Nato in the coming weeks. Finland’s Iltalehti and Sweden’s Expressen tabloids have reported that leaders from Helsinki and Stockholm plan to announce their plans to apply to join the alliance after a meeting in the week of May 16th. Finland, with a 1,300km border with Russia, is seen as more enthusiastic about membership, with 62 per cent in favour according to a recent poll. But Helsinki is anxious that it joins alongside Sweden, its more hesitant western neighbour.