The weather will be unsettled but mild over the bank holiday weekend, with temperatures potentially reaching 17 degrees in some parts of the country. A mix of sunny spells, moderate temperatures and rain showers are expected over the coming days, according to Emer Flood, forecaster with Met Éireann. There will be rain and showers in most parts of the country over the Easter bank holiday weekend, mainly due to a front coming in across the Atlantic ocean, Ms Flood said. However, the west will see most of this rain, and the eastern half of the country generally will get better weather. “On Thursday, it will be cloudy with outbreaks of rain. This rain will start at the western coasts, and will develop into drizzle elsewhere,” said Ms Flood. Tomorrow’s temperature will remain mild, reaching the mid-teens. Parts of the east could experience temperatures of 16 degrees if they are lucky enough to experience sunny breaks between the clouds, according to Ms Flood. Moving into Good Friday, the clouds will remain, but it will be drier than the previous day. “There will be scattered showers and it will be milder again. Temperatures will reach 13 to 17 degrees, with inland counties experiencing hotter weather,” said Ms Flood. “People will really feel the moderate conditions during sunny breaks.” Weekend Saturday will take a wetter turn, with cloudy weather and rain moving in from the west. “There will be persistent rain in west coast counties, and it will be drier in eastern and south eastern places,” said Ms Flood. This rain will push across the country later on Saturday, but temperatures will remain in the mid teens, with highest temperatures of 16 degrees expected inland. Easter Sunday will be more unsettled than the previous days. “It will be breezy and blustery with a spell of rain from the Atlantic. Temperatures will remain around 13 to 15 degrees,” said Ms Flood. Easter Monday will feel a lot cooler, with the warmer weather set to end. “It will feel fresher due to a change in air mass, with temperatures dropping to between nine and 12 degrees.” Fresh breezes and sunny spells can be expected in the east, but rain showers and potential hail will frequent the north and west. “This will affect drivers if they are coming back from a weekend away,” said Ms Flood. Next week’s weather will remain unsettled and cooler, with highest temperatures between nine and 12 degrees.