US healthcare platform Signify Health has appointed Elaine Murphy to lead to its new Irish technology centre, opening at Galway’s Bonham Quay office campus. The news comes less than a month after the technology platform said it would create 125 jobs by the end of 2023 at the centre, recruiting for software engineering, product management and other technology development positions. Ms Murphy previously worked for LiveTiles as senior vice president of its EMEA operations, and was also site lead for games developer Electronic Arts, heading up its Galway office and also taking responsibility for multiple functions in their Austin, Texas location. “It is personally exciting to see industry leaders like Signify Health recognise the breadth of talent in the West of Ireland, and I am very much looking forward to unlocking developmental opportunities both for our talented professional community and for Signify to take healthcare in a much needed new direction,” she said. Ms Murphy holds a bachelor’s and master’s degrees in business studies from the National University of Galway and the Atlantic Technological University, respectively. In 2017, she was selected as a member of Harvard Business School’s Women’s Leadership forum, recognised as a leader in building collaborative cultures, driving innovation in technology and championing diversity and inclusion in the workplace. Ms Murphy also serves as a member of the executive board of the American Chamber of Commerce in Ireland, and became chair of its finance committee in 2020. “Elaine’s extensive technology and leadership experience, together with her deep roots in the West of Ireland, make her uniquely qualified to help us build a technology centre of excellence with professionals who have the experience, ingenuity and passion we need to solve healthcare’s most complex challenges,” said Josh Builder, chief technology officer, Signify Health. “Building the next generation healthcare ecosystem means taking a whole new approach to information management, analytics, systems design and applications. Our integrated US-Ireland team will be at the forefront of making every aspect of healthcare align around what will lead to the best health outcome for each person, and I’m excited to begin this new phase in our journey.” The company is building a hybrid office space in Galway that will allow collaboration while offering staff to work remotely or in the office. Founded in 2017, the US-based company’s platform uses advanced analytics, technology and nationwide healthcare provider networks to create value-based payment programmes. It provides healthcare organisations with the tools to assess and manage risk and identify opportunities for improved patient outcomes, coordination, and cost-savings. It employs more than 2,000 employees in the US, with dual headquarters in New York and Dallas, Texas.