Regional airports are to get more than €16 million in capital funding to help improve infrastructure, supporting safety, security and sustainability projects. Cork Airport is to receive more than €5.4 million under the scheme, with the Ireland West airport at Knock receiving just under €4.8 million and Shannon allocated €4.3 million. Kerry Airport will get €1.1 million in funding, with Donegal receiving just over €722,000. Among the project proposals are solar farms, electrification of airport vehicles, airside and airport staff electric vehicle charging facilities and more energy efficient lighting at the airports. Shannon Group chief executive Mary Considine welcomed the announcement of the funding for the airport, saying it would enable the airport to invest in vital infrastructure and rebuild in the aftermath of the pandemic. “While we have made good strides in restoring air services at Shannon with 26 services to 11 destinations for summer 2022 secured, there is still a challenging few years ahead for the aviation sector,” she said. The funding, which was announced by Minister of State at the Department of Transport, Hildegarde Naughton, is being allocated under the Regional Airports Programme 2021-2025. The scheme is designed to mitigate the environmental impacts of aviation and support the sustainable growth of the sector in line. It is the first time that Shannon and Cork airports have been eligible for this scheme; previously, their size and passenger numbers excluded them from the funding. However, the impact of Covid-19 on passenger numbers in the past two years mean both airports are eligible for funding under the programme in 2022. Ms Naughton said the allocation of funding continued the Government’s commitment to supporting the aviation sector in the wake of the Covid-19 crisis. Around €161 million in aviation specific supports was allocated to airports in 2021. “This capital funding will support a great number of safety and security related capital projects, ensuring that airports can continue to remain compliant with regulatory requirements in these areas,” she said. “ I am pleased to announce also that, in line with the broadening of the scope of the programme, a significant number of this year’s projects have a sustainability focus, facilitating the sustainable growth of the sector.”