Charlie Bird has issued a message of thanks to everyone who supported Climb with Charlie events all over Ireland on Saturday. The former RTÉ broadcaster was joined by family, friends and supporters for a charity climb up Croagh Patrick in Co Mayo. Thousands of people across Ireland and in other parts of the world organised their own events on the day, with all proceeds donated to mental health charity Pieta House and the Irish Motor Neurone Disease Association. According to RTÉ, €2.2 million has been raised so far. Mr Bird announced he was diagnosed with motor neurone disease last October, and the condition has already greatly affected his voice. On Sunday, Mr Bird said on Twitter that he was “completely blown away” by the amazing support from all over Ireland and abroad. “I cried so much yesterday, but they were all tears of joy. A big loving hug to everyone. Thanks everyone.” He added: “I can tell you we are going to go beyond €2 million raised.” Mr Bird also sent a special thanks to his RTÉ colleagues, saying he loved them all. “You have me proud. Jim Fahy and Colm Murray, I am sure were smiling down on all of us yesterday.” Hikes were organised in more than 150 locations across Ireland on Saturday, with some people joining in from abroad in places such as the United States, Canada, England, Australia and Dubai. Mr Bird was joined on the climb up the Reek by his wife, Claire, and his daughters, Orla and Neasa. The Late Late Show presenter Ryan Tubridy, singer Daniel O’Donnell, former boxer Barry McGuigan, musician Matt Molloy and celebrity architect Dermot Bannon were also in attendance. Mr Bird lit five candles at the top of the mountain, one for women’s health campaigner Vicky Phelan, one for everyone with a terminal illness, one for everyone in a dark place with their mental health, one for everyone involved in the fight against Covid and one for the people of Ukraine. The campaign will continue for the next three months so individuals and community groups have time to return funds to the campaign. Donations are still being accepted at climbwithcharlie.ie.