Waterford 1-8 Tipperary 2-13 Tipperary advanced to a Munster semi-final meeting against Limerick having successfully weathered a bright start from Waterford at Fraher Field. Déise wing back Dermot Ryan opened the scoring after three minutes and from the next attack instigated by Conor Murray, Brian Lynch sent James Walsh through on goal. However, Colm O’Shaughnessy illegally stymied Walsh’s gallop, leaving referee Maurice Deegan with no option but to award a penalty, which Jason Curry excellently converted. Tipperary opened their account after seven minutes through Jack Kennedy, with Conor Sweeney converting two frees in the following three minutes. Jason Curry landed his first free of the evening in the 11th minute before Seán O’Connor fired over an excellent point from 30 metres on the quarter hour. Nine minutes elapsed before the game’s next score, with Kennedy doubling his tally for the night. After 26 minutes, Tipperary found the net, also from the penalty spot, when Michael Kiely brought down the on-rushing O’Connor, with Sweeney sending Paudie Hunt the wrong way with his spot-kick. A brace of Mikey O’Shea points in the 30th and 32nd minutes left David Power’s men in command, to the delight of the considerable travelling support. Upon the resumption, Waterford began brightly, with points from Dermot Ryan and Jason Curry (a free) inside three minutes. But between then and full-time, Tipp outscored the hosts by 1-5 to 0-4. O’Connor, a threat down the left all game long, smartly pointed after 47 minutes with the hard-working Conor Murray replying with a point from Waterford’s next attack. Moments later, on his return from injury, Tipp substitute Steven Ryan dashed from beneath the lip of the stand, 60 yards from goal, to brilliantly find the net and effectively end the contest. Yet Waterford didn’t throw in the towel as a brace of Jason Curry frees left them five points in arrears after 51 minutes. But between then and full-time, it was Tipperary who played with the greater rhythm with Sweeney (0-2), O’Connor and Championship debutant Mikey O’Shea all adding to the blue and gold’s tally. WATERFORD: P Hunt; M Kiely, D Ó Cathasaigh, B Looby; D Ryan (0-2), D Houlihan, J O’Sullivan; M Curry, J Curry (1-4; 1-0 pen, four frees); B Lynch, S Curry, C Murray (0-2); J Walsh, T O’Connell, D Corcoran. Subs: T Guiry for M Curry (h/t), J Keane for S Curry (59 mins), J Flavin for J Walsh (67). TIPPERARY: M O’Reilly; S O’Connell, J Feehan, W Eviston; K Fahey, C O’Shaughnessy, J Harney; C Kennedy, J Kennedy (0-2); B Maher, M O’Shea (0-3), M Kehoe; T Doyle, C Sweeney (1-4; 1-0 pen, two frees), S O’Connor (0-4; one free). Subs: E McBride for B Maher (25 mins), Steven O’Brien (1-0) for K Fahey (44), L McGrath for Martin Kehoe (60), T Maher for M O’Shea (66), L Boland for J Kennedy (71). Referee: Maurice Deegan (Laois).