The Irish company that owns Field’s jewellers here and the Fraser Hart chain in the UK has sold two British stores for £4.9 million (€5.9 million) to the Beaverbrook chain, according to its most recent accounts. Mark Paul has the details. Ireland lives in a perpetual data rights Ground Hog Day when it comes to data privacy rights, argues Karlin Lillington in her weekly column. Irish tech unicorn Flipdish has launched a not-for-profit online directory of Irish restaurants and food businesses, Straightfrom.com, designed to act as an alternative to food marketplaces such as JustEat. Ciara O’Brien reports. Seattle-based Remitly Global, a leading digital financial services provider for immigrants and their families, has announced plans to add 120 roles to its operation in Cork over the next six months. The new jobs are supported by IDA Ireland, writes Ciarán Hancock. Irish-based companies are on track to perform well in the upcoming financial year, despite headwinds emanating from the uncertain economic backdrop, according to a survey of chief financial officers by accountancy giant EY. Laura Slattery reports. Cork-based payments company Trustap has raised $3.4 million (€3.1 million) in seed funding to accelerate its growth. This is the largest fundraise for the company, which aims to tackle the lack of trust between buyers and sellers in peer-to-peer transactions. Ciara O’Brien reports. Cantillon wonders at just how rich can one man get and ponders whether we are in for an energy supply shock straight after the price shock. Ciara O’Brien tells us how to manage the digital legacy left behind after death and reviews the Oppo Find X5 Pro phone. Neil Briscoe finds that cars are moving from carbon fibre to carbon-absorbing fibre while New Innovator meets husband and wife team Caoimhe and Gerard Donnelly, thefounders of Legitimate, a content distribution and communications platform for journalists, politicians and content creators. The economy is being affected by several strong trends – where will those trends take us in the year ahead? Cliff Taylor looks at the latest Central Bank growth forecast, inflation, and other economic threats posed by the war in Ukraine. Plus, at the end of this month will see the return of the Pendulum Summit to Dublin after a pandemic hiatus. Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak is among the big names appearing at the annual business and self-empowerment event. Pendulum founder and former Irish rugby international Frankie Sheahan talks to Ciarán Hancock on ourInside Business podcast about what it takes to attract big names to the summit and what attendees can expect this year. Stay up to date with all our business news: sign up to our business news alerts and our Business Today daily email news digest.