Considering the growing diversity both racially and religiously in Ireland, a small group came together in Cork in 2016 with a view to exploring how people from various faith traditions could dialogue openly to come to a better understanding of each other’s faiths and work together to enhance tolerance, co-operation and friendship in society. From these discussions, members of the three Abrahamic faiths – Judaism, Christianity and Islam – together formed Three Faiths Forum (3FF) Cork. To witness to and promote unity in the public place, initiatives include holding public meetings with shared prayers and a meal on days common to all such as Earth Day ; joining in celebrations marking Hanukkah in Shalom Park, which is situated in the area where a Jewish population once thrived in Cork; and accepting invitations with members of all faiths to share such events as the Iftar meal during Ramadan. Conscious of the lack of recognition or appreciation of Muslim and Jewish holy days, 3FF produces an annual inter-faith calendar which marks all such occasions, and this is distributed to schools and communities nationwide. With the objective of developing an understanding of the orientation and perspectives of each faith, the group has produced a pocket guide which has also been distributed among the public and in schools. These materials are also made available to anyone wishing to use them. Due to Covid-19 restrictions in 2020, an online reflection was held on the golden rule, which is the principle of treating others as one wants to be treated and is a maxim found in most religions and cultures. In 2021, another online reflection was held with the theme “Living Together in Peace” involving Baha’i, Buddhist and Hindus as well as the core group of Muslims, Christians and Jews. Open dialogue The event included an address from Cork’s Pádraig Ó Tuama on the lessons to be learned from the experience of Ruth, a Moabite and a foreigner, when she left her home to travel to the land of Judah. This year, 2022, and in line with the original objective to dialogue openly and with respect, 3FF has begun a series of internal presentations and dialogues on members’ faiths. Always conscious of the need to represent our common values in the public space, this year – and timed to coincide with International Women’s Day – the group is holding a webinar focusing on the theme of “Women of Faith Working Together for Peace”. At this event, to be held on March 1st, there will be representatives speaking from two groups: the Sisters of Faith for Peace from Dublin, and the Women’s Interfaith Council from northern Nigeria. Ireland, as we are painfully aware, is not without racism, Islamophobia or anti-Semitism. The Sisters of Faith for Peace, which comprises women of all faiths, holds that all religions and cultures can work together for a common goal and that women have the potential to help overcome religious and cultural differences for the sake of peace. Through interacting with one another, working jointly on peace initiatives and offering workshops and awareness-raising events, the group seeks to contribute to setting the conditions over time for the world to heal some of its differences. Religious identity While there are challenges in Ireland, the situation in northern Nigeria is on a totally different level. With a population of 200 million, approximately half-Christian and half-Muslim, it is an area where conflict too often erupts, primarily due to poverty, insecurity and bad governance, but issues are often framed along lines of religious identity. There are very strong women’s faith organisations in both Christian and Muslim groups and these organisations give the women a voice within their own faith communities. In 2010, groupings from both faiths were invited to come together to confront their concerns as women and to work in dialogue to help bring peace justice and security for all. This resulted in the formation of a Women’s Interfaith Council in Kaduna, northern Nigeria. Despite the difficulties and indeed violence experienced, the ongoing commitment of convinced Muslim and Christian women of faith has led to the growth of this organisation. While negative stories travel more quickly than positive news, it is heartening that the Women’s Interfaith Council received the Aachen Peace Prize in 2021 for their work. All are invited to learn from the experiences of both groups and to join in a facilitated sharing and discussion at the Cork Three Faith Forum webinar on March 1st, starting at 7pm. People can register for this event online through the organization’s Facebook page.