Family values Lockdown, according to the lads at Clayton Hotels, has led to us valuing family more. Seemingly, 95 per cent of us believe that 3G holidays (that’s multigenerational to you and me) are fun for all. While that does leave me worrying about the experiences of the other 5 per cent, it’s still a very loved-up statistic. Funnily enough, the same survey had only about a third saying they were going to see family more this year, but let’s not get too tangled up in numbers. Instead, revel in the tenner off you get – per night – by booking direct with claytonhotels.com, for spots in Dublin, Cork, Galway, Limerick, Sligo, Belfast and Wexford. You can squabble about the statistics later. Film-star looks Beating out Berlin, Malaga and Stadlandet, Cahir Castle has won a European Location of the Year award for its stellar role in last year’s The Green Knight. Castle admission €3/€5, heritageireland.ie. Stadlandet is in western Norway and stepped up as the backdrop for the film Dune. Back in Ireland, stay a stone’s throw (though we wouldn’t encourage any actual throwing, obviously) from the castle at the Cahir House Hotel, with B&B from €95 per room. Meanwhile, the nearby Cashel Palace is concluding its multimillion makeover. With owner Susan Magnier of Coolmore Stud, it’s clearly got a good pedigree. Reopening on March 1st with B&B from €309 in the Carriage House, it goes up to €719 for a suite with views of the famous Rock of Cashel. cashelpalacehotel.ie Ski highs Head for the heights, and then it’s downhill all the way with Crystal Ski’s deal of seven nights at the Constellations Apartments in la Plange, France. It’s a ski-in, ski-out location, via blue run. Those in the know can also head for red. And yes, there are nursery slopes too. From €409 pps, based on four sharing, including flights ex-Dublin, luggage and transfers. Departing March 26th. Also on offer for the same departure date are Kaprun and Zell am See in Austria, with seven nights at €529 and €699 respectively. crystalski.ie Ooh-là-là While the name Mob House might make you think of riotous times, Paris’s latest opening is a suaver affair. Part of the Mob group, which aims to take on the world (openings due in 2023 for Bordeaux, Los Angeles and Washington), it is a collaboration between designer Philippe Starck, hotelier Michel Reybier, and self-proclaimed “philosopher and urbanist” Cyril Aouizerate, all of which means you’re wading through acres of cool. The rooms are designed for longer stays and combine bed, office and meeting room (type of meetings not specified), and they promise “a thousand other surprises” on the outskirts of Paris for even more je na sais quoi. From €71 per room, mobhotel.com