Oakfield Place is a well-located cul-de-sac off Clanbrassil Street that is around the corner from brunch spot Bibi’s, one of several hot spots in this neighbourhood. Bastible – recently awarded a Michelin star – its sister establishment, Clanbrassil House, and The Fumbally are others. Small wonder that a professional couple spotted the city-pad possibilities of number 8, then a single-storey cottage of 55sq m (592sq ft) with a Ber of G. It had two internal bedrooms, neither of which had a window, and you had to walk through the kitchen to get to the second bedroom, one of the owners recalls. “It was basic but had potential. Either you’re the person that can see it, or you’re not.” Evidently they were. It came to the market asking €350,000 and this is what they paid for it in October 2018, according to the Property Price Register. They didn’t change its size, but they flipped the layout. They also reduced the number of bedrooms, the rationale being that the space was better used for everyday living than an occasionally-used guest room. This was smart. The double bedroom is now to the front, where the living room had been. The couple did all the design work, taking inspiration from a million online sources, including Pinterest. They also did a lot of primary research and viewed homes of this style to see what others had done, and this attention to detail shows. They put their living space to the back, where it feels really private and full of light thanks to the fact that it has been wrapped around the existing courtyard. In the kitchen quarter they raised the ceiling level to accommodate taller-thanstandard black units that have been topped with timber. Designed by the couple the stylish cupboards were fabricated by an uncle, who runs Thomas Roe Kitchens. The open-plan area is set in a C-shape and zoned to give a dining area big enough to fit a good-size table that looks out to the small north-facing yard. The living area is to the back, where a sofa faces a wildly patterned wall, one of several projects completed during the various lockdowns. They bought the jungle-print wallpaper online. Hidden in a cupboard at the very end of the house is a small utility where laundry can pile up out of sight and where you can safely leave the window open to aid drying times, once the mercury rises a bit. A small but stylishly appointed shower room with matt black hardware is located between the bedroom and living room. The couple also converted the attic, turning it into a multifunctional space that can accommodate guests when they come to stay. They say it was a godsend during the lockdowns when both were working from home. It is accessed via a monochromatically carpeted stairs. The refurbishment has seen the building rise up to a C1 Ber. Still measuring 55sq m but now with a further 13sq m in the attic it is seeking €495,000 through Sherry FitzGerald.