Leinster and Munster have agreed to reschedule their two clashes in the United Rugby Championship which will be played at the Aviva Stadium and Thomond Park. The game at the Aviva Stadium was initially fixed for Saturday, April 2nd, at 7pm but that game will now be played at the same venue on the weekend of May 20th/21st with the kick-off to be confirmed by URC in the coming weeks. The return fixture at Thomond Park, postponed from St Stephen’s Day, will instead now be played on Saturday, April 2nd, at 7pm. The switch is due to concerns over the condition of the playing surface at the Limerick venue after Ed Sheeran’s two shows at Thomond Park on May 5th and 6th Commenting on the move, Leinster Rugby chief executive Mick Dawson said, “This was not a straight forward process by any means but the reality is that we were approached by the IRFU and Munster Rugby with a view to facilitating a switch in dates for the two games. “We understand that there will be disappointment in particular amongst Leinster Rugby fans who have been planning for the game on April 2, but a solution needed to be found for that fixture in May with Thomond Park unavailable. “The past few seasons have been difficult on us all and flexibility and working to find solutions in ever-changing scenarios has become the reality for all organisations and that is the case here also. We were faced with a dilemma and we worked hard together to find a solution that ensures that Leinster Rugby and Munster Rugby supporters will enjoy two great days out in Aviva Stadium and Thomond Park. “We now have a full fixture list in the United Rugby Championship and in the Champions Cup with plenty of big games, and big interpro games at that, to look forward to.” Tickets purchased by Leinster season ticket holders will automatically be updated to reflect the change in dates. Supporters that purchased match tickets for the game at Aviva Stadium on April 2nd will be contacted directly by Ticketmaster to confirm the date change and options available to them.