Star turn Okay, so Kenneth Branagh’s Belfast wasn’t shot in Belfast, but surely its seven Oscar nominations will still inspire visits to the northern capital? Covid concerns meant that most of the filming was done on special sets in England, but don’t let that dent the magic. And for the full-on film-inspired package, why not base yourself at the Titanic? Yes, we know – the Titanic was a ship before it was a film, but there’s no need for any sinking feelings with its Midweek Sail offer giving you B&B from £99 per room, or a two-night break and dinner on one night from £329 per room. titanichotelbelfast.com Eco magic Celebrating a silver award for their eco efforts, the Address Collective Hotels are basking in sustainable glory. Celebrate with them, in Dublin or Cork, with their Taste the Address package, including dinner, bed and breakfast, welcome cocktails and late checkout, from €179 in Dublin and €169 in Cork, prices per room. Stay a second night and get €49 off the regular rate. Or try Shop till you Drop (dropping not obligatory) and you get B&B, a welcome cocktail and a €50 One for All voucher, from €163 in Dublin and €159 in Cork. theaddresscollective.com Bonjour Brittany I have had a soft spot for Brittany ever since I got epically lost there. Going by ferry is a draw for anyone who still has residual being-cooped-up-on-an-aeroplane nerves – or simply for the convenience of bringing your own car. Brittany Ferries is offering up to €200 off bookings made before February 28th, and lovely packages such as five nights in a chalet at Lesconil, for €210 per person, based on two adults, two children, and a standard car, departing Cork on May 28th. Or head sooner for St Malo, and get five nights B&B for a family of four, including ferry and your standard car for €1,228, departing Cork on April 30th. brittany-ferries.ie Zoom zoom F1 Drive to Survive almost made a Formula One fan out of me, if Chris Hemsworth as James Hunt in 2013’s Rush hadn’t already done the job. With a fourth Netflix season on the way, the already converted will be oiling their sprockets with joy. See the real thing in Barcelona this May, with Cassidy Travel’s Spanish Grand Prix package. Get return flights, a central Barcelona hotel for two nights, and a three-day general admission ticket (upgrades available) from €579 pps. Dates: May 20th to 22nd. cassidytravel.ie