Russia’s currency tumbled more than 28 per cent to a record low in early trading on Monday, as a new round of western sanctions heaped pressure on the country’s financial system in response to its invasion of Ukraine. Attempting to counter the depreciation, Russia’s central bank raised its key interest rate to 20 per ent from 9.5 per cent in an emergency move, and authorities told export-focused companies to be ready to sell foreign currency as the rouble tumbled to record lows. The rouble hit a low of 120 to the dollar on electronic currency trading platform EBS after president Vladimir Putin ordered his military command to put nuclear-armed forces on high alert on Sunday, while the West imposed harsh sanctions against Russia. The central bank, which says it targets inflation at 4 per cent and will do all necessary to ensure financial stability, said the rate increase will bring deposit rates to levels “needed to compensate for the increased depreciation and inflation risks”. “This is needed to support financial and price stability and protect citizens’ savings from depreciation,” it said. The rate hike to levels above the 17 per cent seen in 2014 when Russian annexed Crimea from Ukraine comes after Western countries moved to block certain Russian banks’ access to the Swift international payment system to punish Moscow for its invasion of Ukraine. Russia calls its actions in Ukraine a “special operation” that it says is not designed to occupy territory but to destroy its southern neighbour’s military capabilities and capture what it regards as dangerous nationalists. “External conditions for the Russian economy have drastically changed,” the central bank said in a statement. In another attempt to support the rouble, the central bank and the finance ministry said they will jointly decide on ordering Russian exporting companies to sell 80 per ent of their foreign currency revenues on the market. The recent moves add to a slew of measures announced since Thursday to support domestic markets, as the state scrambles to manage the broadening fallout from Western sanctions. Russian authorities have also ordered brokers to suspend short selling on the Russian market and stop executing orders by foreign legal entities and individuals to sell Russian securities. “These measures may help calm down increased market nervousness, but at the same time they undermine the foundation of the monetary policy, focused on inflationary targeting and flexible exchange rate,” BCS Global markets said in a note. “Unfavourable external environment made Russia’s monetary policy unsustainable and we do not rule out a possible rate hike going forward or further unexpected and non-market decisions.” On Friday, rating agency S&P Global cut Russia’s debt rating to “junk” status, underlining the risk that the military assault on Ukraine could prove even more deeply damaging to the country’s financial markets. Russia’s central bank sought to calm market nerves on Sunday, saying it would offer unlimited liquidity to banks. “The Russian banking system is stable, and has sufficient capacity of capital and liquidity to function in any situation,” it said. -Reuters and The Financial Times