Shares in building materials giant CRH and Ryanair, both of which have large exposures to Ukraine, were among the main fallers on the Irish stock market on Tuesday morning as global financial markets were thrown into turmoil after Russia attacked its western neighbour overnight. CRH, which entered Ukraine in 1999 and counts among the top cement producers in the country, saw its shares fall 4.5 per cent in early trading. Ryanair’s shares dropped 3.3 per cent. The carrier, , which said last month it could base up to 20 planes in Ukraine over the next few years if Russia did not invade and has been planning to fly 230 flights weekly flights from three Ukrainian airports this summer. The Iseq overall index slid 3.2 per cent to 7,695.13, with banking stocks also among the main decliners. The pan-European Stoxx 600 index fell 2.9 per cent, hitting its lowest since May 2021 while marking a correction or 10 per cent decline from its January record high. The German DAX fell 3.7 per cent to March 2021 lows, bearing the biggest brunt of the sell-off on fears over the country’s heavy reliance on energy supplies from Russia. A surge in oil prices helped limit losses on the UK’s commodity-heavy FTSE 100, which fell 2.4 per cent. Russian forces fired missiles at several cities in Ukraine and landed troops on its south coast on Thursday, officials and media said, after President Vladimir Putin authorised what he called a special military operation. The United States and its allies will impose “severe sanctions” on Russia, U.S. President Joe Biden said. Europe’s oil & gas index fell the least among sectors, down 1.2 per cent as oil prices surged about 6 per cent, pushing Brent crude past $100 a barrel for the first time since 2014. European banks most exposed to Russia including Austria’s Raiffeisen Bank, UniCredit and Societe Generale dropped between 5 per cent and 6.6 per cent, while the wider banking index fell 4.2 per cent. Technology and travel and leisure were among the other top decliners. Futures tracking New York’s S&P 500 fell 2.0 per cent and the tech-heavy Nasdaq 100 dropped 2.6 per cent. -Additional reporting, Reuters