Taoiseach Micheál Martin has said Russia’s push into eastern Ukraine had “crossed a line” that will meet with a firm and united response from EU leaders. He was speaking in Berlin alongside Chancellor Olaf Scholz, who attacked the move as a “serious breach” of international law and diplomatic agreements. The German leader promised a robust mix of sanctions and diplomacy to avoid the “catastrophe of war” in Europe. At their joint press conference, Mr Scholz announced he had intervened to halt the permit process for a new undersea Russian gas pipeline to Germany, Nord Stream 2. “The situation has changed dramatically,” he said. Nord Stream 2 is a 1,200km pipeline under the Baltic Sea, which was planned to take gas from Russia to Germany, pending approval from Germany and the European Union. Mr Martin said Russia’s move created a “chilling effect for small states across European continent” and called on Russia to reconsider its actions. “This crosses a line, it is a flagrant violation of international law and a breach of Ukraine’s sovereignty,” said Mr Martin, hours after Russian leader Vladimir Putin ordered troops over the border into Moscow-controlled territories in the east of Ukraine. “Our unity is our strength and there is very clear unity of purpose within all EU member states.” The German leader agreed that the move was a breach of the UN charter and Helsinki agreements on national sovereignty and the immovability of national borders — as well as the more recent Minsk agreement. “It is up to the international community to respond to these one-sided, incomprehensible and unjustified actions of the Russian president in a co-ordinated and targeted way,” he said, “so we send a signal to Moscow that such actions will not remain without consequence.” After a series of video and telephone calls with Washington and Paris, German officials said Mr Scholz and other leaders are determined to continue efforts to engage with Moscow while introducing a first stage of targeted but limited sanctions. Elsewhere, British prime minister Boris Johnson said Britain would immediately impose hard economic sanctions on Russia, which would be set out at the House of Commons. “We will immediately institute a package of economic sanctions,” Mr Johnson told reporters. “This is, I should stress, just the first barrage of UK economic sanctions against Russia, because we expect I’m afraid that there is more Russian irrational behaviour to come.” A Reuters witness saw tanks and other military hardware moving through the separatist-controlled city of Donetsk after Mr Putin formally recognised the breakaway regions and ordered the deployment of Russian forces to “keep the peace”. The Ukrainian military said two soldiers were killed and 12 wounded in shelling by pro-Russian separatists in the east in the past 24 hours, the most casualties this year, as ceasefire violations increased. Mr Putin’s announcement on Monday drew international condemnation and immediate US sanctions, with president Joe Biden signing an executive order to halt US business activity in the breakaway regions, Donetsk and Luhansk. Britain has also threatened to cut off Russian companies’ access to US dollars and British pounds, blocking them from raising capital in London and to expose what Mr Johnson calls the “Russian doll” of property and company ownership. France and Germany also agreed to respond with sanctions. China called for all parties to exercise restraint while Japan said it was ready to join international sanctions on Moscow in the event of a full-scale invasion. Speaking at an emergency meeting of the Security Council late on Monday, US ambassador to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, said: “This is the moment – the moment to stand up and defend the United Nations and our international order as we know it. “We can, will, and must stand united in our calls for Russia to withdraw its forces, return to the diplomatic table and work toward peace.” The US withdrew its remaining diplomats in Ukraine on Monday, deploying them to Poland, as Mr Putin’s move rattled markets around the world. Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, appealed for strong sanctions as the only way of stalling further Russian encroachment. The Russian UN ambassador, Vassily Nebenzia, warned Western powers to “think twice” and not worsen the situation. Troops moving in Ukraine’s military said on its Facebook page it had recorded 84 cases of shelling by separatists who it said had opened fire on about 40 settlements along the front line with heavy artillery, in breach of ceasefire agreements. Russia denies any plan to attack its neighbour, but it has amassed troops on Ukraine’s borders and threatened “military-technical” action unless it receives sweeping security guarantees, including a promise that Ukraine will never join Nato. In Berlin, Mr Martin and Mr Scholz also discussed post-pandemic economic recovery in the EU as well as continued tensions in the Brexit process. At their joint press conference Mr Scholz described German-Irish relations as “close, trusting and good”. Both Berlin and Dublin had a particular interest in continued close relations with the UK, he said, but it was now up to London to make a move towards the European Commission and find practical solutions on implementing the Northern Ireland Protocol. “The British government must meet its commitments under international law and implement the protocol,” he said. “It is the guarantee of freedom and peace on the island of Ireland, to protect the internal market and is a central pillar of the relationship between the UK and the EU that we agreed after Brexit.” – Additional reporting Reuters, Guardian