The writer Jan Carson, who comes from Protestant evangelical background in Co Antrim, has said she cried when she got her Irish passport in recent years. The author of the recently published novel The Raptures, who won the EU Prize for Literature Ireland in 2019 for her previous book The Fire Starters, said Brexit “kicked off” at the same time as her writing career. She retained her British passport along with her new Irish one. “It’s three years since I got it. At the time it felt like a really practical thing because . . . I do travel around Europe a lot and I didn’t want to be standing in queues and I just thought, I’ll have both,” she told The Irish Times Borderlines podcast. Listen to the podcast on Apple, Spotify and RSS. “But it was really emotional. I wasn’t prepared for when I came home and it was lying on the welcome mat beside my letter box. I did cry. And I still haven’t unpicked what that was, whether it was a good kind of emotion of I’m crying because I am more things now, or that it felt . . . you know, I’m the first person in my family to have an Irish passport, definitely. “My granda was an Orangeman and nobody else in the family has an Irish passport so I did feel a wee bit like, well I wonder have I betrayed something? There was a lot of mix, when I say lots of identity, lots of emotion as well,” she said. “It was a practical thing but probably bizarrely provoked by a combination of Brexit and winning the European prize for literature. I felt like you can’t really be the Irish laureate for the European prize without an Irish passport.” Carson said she felt culturally Irish since she first started writing, although learning no Irish history, mythology or folklore in secondary school left her “on the back foot when it comes to being a 42-year-old woman in a very complex place”. She said: “It’s an honour to say you’re an Irish writer, it really is.” But she said there was a lot to be gained from having plural identities. “When someone describes me as an Irish writer I’m not offended, it’s not untrue, but can we keep talking about that because there’s more going on there. “Bizarrely, I don’t even know what this means, but if someone was to describe me as a British writer, I think I would have much more of a curling up, like you’ve reduced me a bit . . . I don’t know what that says about my politics if I get a wee bit curled up if I get labelled a British writer.” Carson, from Ballymena, said the rural evangelical community she grew up in was mostly apolitical. “It was a world so fearful of the world that politics was a dirty thing.” But she has seen in some churches “much more of a return to politics being preached from the pulpit”. “I’m hearing from my friends and the people I know who still belong to those churches that we’re moving back to those Paisley days of the minister standing up and telling you how to vote or what you think about things, and that’s really dangerous.” Carson said she still has a faith and has recently completed an essay for the Centre Culturel in Paris about “what we lose when we lose organised religion”.