Coca-Cola Ireland has been supporting communities and businesses throughout its seventy years of operation on the island of Ireland, as they look to create a better shared future. The past two years have proven to be one of the most challenging times for all of society with young people disproportionally impacted by the crisis. Many have been disconnected from crucial services and supports with research undertaken by the Irish Youth Foundation showing that 82 per cent of youth leaders believe the pandemic will have a long-term negative impact on young people.  Agnese Filippi, country manager, Coca-Cola Ireland said: “The impact of the pandemic has been particularly hard on our young people. That’s why alongside our local bottling partner, Coca-Cola HBC Ireland and Northern Ireland, and The Coca-Cola Foundation, we tailored our community-based initiatives to specifically address some of the emerging needs facing Ireland’s youth. “This includes the Coca-Cola Thank You Fund which has been reorientated to support young people with the skills and supports they need to thrive and create more sustainable communities in the areas they live.” The Coca-Cola Thank You Fund was first established in 2011 and over the years it has supported programmes including community, social and education projects aimed at youth, healthy and active lifestyle initiatives, and sustainability leadership. Now in its eleventh year, the Fund has provided €1,255,000 to over 100 non-profit organisations across the island of Ireland. The company recently revealed the 13 local community groups who are set to receive a share of this year’s €100,000 Coca-Cola Thank You Fund. The projects are focused on building resilience amongst young people, meeting the education gaps that exist and tackling the mental health challenges facing Ireland’s youth. One of community groups to benefit from the 2021 Coca-Cola Thank You Fund is The Yard @ Solas Project in the Liberties, in Dublin’s south inner city. “The Yard programme is a social enterprise with an ambition to equip young people with sustainable skills and knowledge that will empower them to fulfil their personal and professional potential,” Filippi explains. “The team at the Solas Project have developed a 16-week programme dedicated to developing personal, practical and business skills for young people aged 16 to 24. Each participant receives hands-on work experience, learning everything from woodwork skills and sales and marketing to the ins and outs of running a social enterprise. “Having met with the group, I was inspired to see how The Yard @ Solas is helping young people in Dublin to reach their full potential.” This year’s Fund also saw the return of the popular People’s Choice Award, giving the public the chance to have their say and vote for their favourite local group, with the winning group Down Syndrome Ireland Mayo Branch receiving a €5,000 grant for their Drama Therapy Camp. Designed to open a new world of communication, the camp will enable those living with Down syndrome to express and vocalise their feelings while giving them the tools and confidence to know that their voice can be heard. The Coca-Cola Thank You Fund is one of a number of community initiatives that the Coca-Cola System in Ireland is championing to help young people to navigate a better future. Now in its sixth year, the Coca-Cola HBC #YouthEmpowered programme has been building confidence and resilience among young people as they navigate new career and learning opportunities across Ireland and Northern Ireland. Having provided free training to over 5,000 young people across the island of Ireland since 2017, this programme is designed to support and empower 18-30-year olds who are not in education or employment through access to employability training, online content and mentoring support. With free training opportunities and one-to-one career guidance, the programme provides an important stepping-stone for young people on the island of Ireland who are looking for support and guidance that aligns with their needs and ensures they develop the tools and skills to succeed. “As we begin to emerge from the pandemic, Coca-Cola Ireland is committed to investing in a better shared future for the communities we live and work in,” Filippi explains. “Community involvement is important to us, as can be seen through the over 100 NGOs supported by the Coca-Cola Thank You Fund since it was founded. It allows us to empower young people as they effect change and make a real difference in the lives of those living in their local community. “I wish all of the Fund recipients the best of luck in delivering their projects in the coming months. We look forward to hearing about the impact they have.” Find out more about the Coca-Cola Thank You Fund - www.coca-cola.ie/thankyou.