The “A” – or, indeed, another other qualifying letter in a house number – tends to announce that the property is a newish build, often in the side or back garden of an older house. Not so 87A Rathdown Park, which has had the additional A since it was built about 50 years ago at the same time as its neighbours along the road. When the builder of much of Rathdown, Thomas Stringer, was finished in the 1930s there was a section of Rathdown Park leading up to Bushy Park that remained undeveloped for some decades until it was lined with mostly semi-detached two-storey houses. Number 87A, called Sunnybank, last sold in 2000 when it was a four-bedroom property. A few years after they bought, the present owners, who are now downsizing, did a major renovation job, extending it to the side, front, rear and up into the attic to create a six-bedroom (three en suite) family home with 216sq m (2,324sq ft) of space. It’s immediately clear from entering that this house has had a major makeover – there’s new oak flooring, an oak staircase and replacement internal oak contemporary-style doors; oak is very much the signature material throughout the property. Downstairs there are two reception rooms; the living room at the rear is larger than original as the back of the house was extended out and it has double doors opening to the patio and the garden. There is also a spacious eat-in kitchen with cream gloss units. As people tend to like glazed doors opening directly from the kitchen to the back garden, new owners might explore changing the layout to install them. Access to the back garden is through the adjoining utility room. Converting the garage gave another room downstairs, which is now used as a home office, but it could also be a playroom depending on the new owners’ requirements. Another working-from-home option might be to convert the home gym in the small brick outbuilding at the end of the back garden. Above, the bedrooms are spread over two floors; the main bedroom at the top of the house has a full size en suite bathroom complete with twin sinks. Storage was clearly part of the brief in the 2004 build as the bedrooms feature built-in wardrobes. There is off-street parking to the front for a couple of cars. Sherry FitzGerald is selling 87A Rathdown Park, Terenure, with an asking price of €1.65 million.