Six Nations: Ireland v Italy Kick-off: 3pm, Sunday. Venue: Aviva Stadium. How to follow: The Irish Times liveblog will begin at 2.30pm. On TV: Live on Virgin Media One. Andy Farrell has made six changes to the Ireland starting XV for Sunday’s round three 2022 Guinness Six Nations game against Italy, with Ulster fullback Michael Lowry named to make his debut while Dan Sheehan and Ryan Baird are also selected for their first starts in the Championship. Peter O’Mahony, as captain, James Lowe and Robbie Henshaw also return to the starting lineup, with Joey Carbery retained at outhalf as Johnny Sexton is named on the bench. There are also a couple of positional switches, with Caelan Doris moving from blindside to number 8 and Mack Hansen switching from the left to the right wing. Jack Conan moves to the bench, where in addition to Sexton, Rob Herring, David Kilcoyne, Kieran Treadwell, Craig Casey and James Hume are all called up to a much-changed matchday squad. Five of the starting XV in Ireland’s defeat by France in Paris a fortnight ago drop out of the squad, namely Hugo Keenan, Andrew Conway, Bundee Aki, Ronan Kelleher and James Ryan. While Kelleher had already been ruled out of the rest of the Championship with the shoulder injury he sustained in the first half in the Stade de France, it transpires that Ryan took a knock in training, and has an adductor issue. In addition to Iain Henderson, who tested positive for Covid-19 earlier this week, Cian Healy, Conor Murray and Jack Carty also miss out on the matchday 23. The Ireland head coach and his assistants are thus using this game as an opportunity to increase not only the investment in Carbery by affording him the opportunity to back up his composed first Six Nations start in Paris, but also to look at their options at fullback. Keenan had started 18 successive Tests since making his debut in the corresponding fixture against Italy two seasons ago, which was re-arranged for October 2020 at an empty Aviva. All but two of those 18 starts were at fullback, the exceptions being the Autumn Nations Cup games against Georgia and Scotland, when Jacob Stockdale - sidelined for the season - wore 15. The 23-year-old Lowry, 5ft 7in (1.7m) and 12st 4lb (79kg), has been in electric form for Ulster this season, scoring three tries in four Heineken Champions Cup games. Blessed with pace and blindingly quick feet, his capacity for beating the first tackle, and more, is evidenced by his statistics in those four Euro games - eight clean breaks, 23 defenders beaten and 562 metres made. Lowry attended Royal Belfast Academical Institution, where he captained the team to a Medallion Shield and three Ulster Schools Cup titles as an outhalf, before coming through the Ulster academy and playing for the Irish under-20s. Hence he also brings a good kicking and passing game as well as operating as a second playmaker for Ulster. After his favourable impression in Paris as a 25th minute replacement for the unfortunate Kelleher, the 23-year-old Sheehan looks made for Test match rugby and was always expected to start. Baird has slipped down the pecking order a little at Leinster, behind Ryan and Ross Molony (a late call-up to the squad this week after Henderson’s withdrawal), but Farrell and Paul O’Connell have retained faith in the 22-year-old St Michael’s College product, who wins his eighth cap and makes his second start, after his full debut last June against the USA. The 26-year-old Treadwell hadn’t featured in a Farrell squad until this Six Nations, his three previous caps having been earned under Joe Schmidt in 2017 against Japan (twice) and Fiji. Hailing from Sutton in South London, and a product of the Harlequins academy, Treadwell’s mother is Irish and he played for the Ireland under-18s before representing the English under-20s. Since joining Ulster in 2016, Treadwell has played 119 times for the province and at 6’ 6½” is an athletic, explosive and quick lock, whose set-piece work has developed well in the last year. He can also scrum on the tighthead side. Ireland: Michael Lowry (Ulster/Banbridge); Mack Hansen (Connacht), Garry Ringrose (Leinster/UCD), Robbie Henshaw (Leinster/Buccaneers), James Lowe (Leinster); Joey Carbery (Munster/Clontarf), Jamison Gibson Park (Leinster); Andrew Porter (Leinster/UCD), Dan Sheehan (Leinster/Lansdowne), Tadhg Furlong (Leinster/Clontarf), Tadhg Beirne (Munster/Lansdowne), Ryan Baird (Leinster/ Dublin University), Peter O’Mahony (Munster/Cork Constitution, capt), Josh van der Flier (Leinster/St Mary’s College), Caelan Doris (Leinster/St Mary’s College). Replacements: Rob Herring (Ulster/Ballynahinch), David Kilcoyne (Munster/UL Bohemians), Finlay Bealham (Connacht/Buccaneers), Kieran Treadwell (Ulster/Ballymena), Jack Conan (Leinster/Old Belvedere), Craig Casey (Munster/Shannon), Johnny Sexton (Leinster/St Mary’s College), James Hume (Ulster/Banbridge).