Turkey is a country where the ancient meets the modern – an unmissable destination where east meets west. Surrounded by water on three sides, Turkey’s coasts are some of the most beautiful in the world. The unique Mediterranean climate allows over six months of summertime in its southern region. Uniquely positioned in both Europe and Asia, the country offers visitors fascinating history together with a huge variety of modern holiday choices. Soak in the warmth of the sun, taste delicious food, smell the fresh fruits and vegetables and discover for yourself all that this fabulous country has to offer. Irish visitors to Turkey can shortly avail of direct travel from Dublin to Antalya: Flights commence from 1st April until 28th September, running three times a week. So, what sights should you see? A paradise for holidaymakers, Antalya has a rich archaeological culture, beautiful beaches, sea and sun. It is a wonderful family destination, as well as an award-winning golf destination. The fifth largest city and travel hotspot in Turkey – over 15 million tourists visit every year – Antalya is located on Anatolia’s southwest coast. The city is Turkey’s biggest international sea resort and is a gateway to the Mediterranean region which is known as the Turkish Riviera for its shimmering blue waters. Must-visit spots There are a huge amount of places to go and things to see and do in Antalya and its nearby regions, bound to suit all the family. Discover them below. Upper Düden Waterfalls Antalya is a nature lover’s paradise with its warm climate and cascading waterfalls – the Upper Düden Waterfalls are an oasis of serenity just 10km north of the city. For a small entrance fee you can see stunning views of the falls from above, walk in the gorge and discover the hidden cave located behind the waterfall. Lower Düden Waterfalls Some 8km east of the old city, right on the coastline, the Lower Düden Waterfalls form part of the same underground river. You can access these falls free of charge, but the best views can be seen from a boat trip out at sea. Konyaaltı Beach One of the most popular beaches in Antalya, Konyaaltı Beach is located on the western part of the city and stretches for nearly 7km. It has numerous cafes and restaurants and is the perfect place to cool off on a hot summer’s day. Old Town of Antalya Kaleiçi, the old town at the centre of Antalya, stretches around the old harbour, which dates back to ancient times and offers breathtaking views of the mountains. Here you will see Antalya’s symbolic clock tower and the statue of King Attalus II of Pergamon. Discover renovated Ottoman houses standing side by side with Hadrian’s Gate, the city’s most prominent historic monument. Visit Kırkmerdiven (Forty Steps), historic stone steps built in the 15th century, which lead down to the harbour, where you can enjoy traditional cafes and bars. Eat and drink Antalya is famous for its local food: try the traditional Turkish breakfast, börek (a savoury filled pastry), freshly grilled fish and seafood, and, of course, Turkish mezes (traditional appetizers). Also try şiş köfte or meatballs, which come on skewers and are a simple dish filled with flavour. Enjoy them with a warm pide and toppings such as cumin, tomato, pepper and baked onion. Piyazi is a zesty, tasty bean dish drizzled in a tarator sauce of tahini, lemon juice, vinegar, salt, garlic, olive oil, and water. This tasty salad has been a firm favourite in Antalya for almost 100 years. Don’t miss out on freshly squeezed pomegranate and orange juice. After a busy morning of sightseeing, regionally grown, hand-pressed juice is a refreshing and delicious treat. For families Antalya is brilliant for a family holiday thanks to its miles of safe, white, sandy beaches, offering a variety of swimming, beach sports and water sports facilities, as well as nearby cafes and restaurants. Some beaches offer camping nearby, as well as beautiful scenery to enjoy and plentiful sunshine. Families will enjoy the area’s all-inclusive resorts with kids clubs, plus the hotels and resorts are renowned for their child-friendly food and service. Antalya also boasts world-class theme parks and waterparks offering fun for all the family. You won’t find a better destination to tick all the boxes for a fun-packed family getaway. Surrounding area Patara The ancient city of Patara was discovered over 30 years ago, with recent historical excavations and discoveries making Ancient Patara a fascinating place to visit. It was the birthplace of St Nicholas, the 4th-century bishop of Myra who is more commonly known today as Santa Claus. It is also famous for the lighthouse built by the Emperor Nero, currently undergoing restoration, which is claimed to be one of the oldest lighthouses in the world. The ancient harbour area has been compared by archaeologists to Ephesus. It is also home to the gigantic Granary of Hadrian, which was used in ancient times as a storage area for cereals and olive oil. Aspendos The ancient city of Aspendos is home to the best-preserved ancient theatre in the Mediterranean. Built in the 2nd century, it could easily hold up to 20,000 people and is located about 40km to the east of Antalya. The theatre is still in use today and with exceptional acoustics is mainly used for concerts and ballets. History buffs can spend hours here visiting the ancient ruins of the city with its arena, aqueducts, streets and temples. Termessos Half an hour’s drive northwest of Antalya, the ancient city of Termessos sits on a mountaintop in a beautiful, pine-forested national park. Termessos is notable for having a theatre that looks out over the breathtaking Taurus Mountains; look out for pine marten and squirrels. Side If you’re looking for a mix of beach time and history, the resort town of Side is one of the best places to visit on Turkey’s Mediterranean coast. The wealth of ancient ruins located right in the town are major tourist attractions. Bazaar experiences - shopping in Antalya İki Kapılı Han Bazaar For a more historic experience, head over to this old, beautiful and covered bazaar from the late 15th century that is just north of Antalya’s old town, Kaleiçi. It’s a great place to find handmade souvenirs, as well as merchants selling beautiful textiles, Iznik style tiles, and spices. Lara Street Market Every Saturday, this is Antalya’s biggest street bazaar. You’ll find stalls selling clothing, jewellery, accessories, bags, and souvenirs. This is definitely the place to go if you’re a passionate bargain hunter or want to mingle with the locals. Go golfing in Antalya The next ‘must visit’ destination on your golf break wish-list should be Antalya. Turkey has invested heavily in golf-course design over the past 20 years and is now a true golf destination. With high-quality hotels and courses, it has attracted golfers from Europe and worldwide. A golfer’s paradise, it boasts fantastic golf courses and many luxurious hotels. These are all located in close proximity to one another, meaning transfer times are kept to a minimum. With over a dozen golf courses to choose from, all of which are maintained to the highest standards, you will not get bored playing golf in Antalya. There is a fantastic mix of championship golf courses too. For eager golfers who like to play late into the evening, some courses even boast a state-of-the-art floodlighting system, allowing play to continue long after the warm Mediterranean sun has gone down. So, if you’d like to enjoy some great golf, excellent food and top-class service in luxurious surroundings, then Antalya is just the destination for you. Visit goantalyaturkiye.com for more information on Antalya