Billionaire businessman Denis O’Brien’s Jepview has secured planning permission for a 15 storey office block in Dublin’s docklands. Jepview Ltd got the green light for the scheme at Two Grand Canal Quay after revising its original plans – which had envisaged a 15-storey high office block and a second eight-storey unit – in response to Dublin City Council expressing concerns over the scale of the proposal. The council planner’s report which recommended planning permission stated the scheme would “upgrade a prominent location on Grand Canal Quay, contribute to employment in the area and will allow for the construction of a modern building in an inner city location proximate to public transport and other amenities”. The planner’s report also stated that the scheme would facilitate high quality office accommodation, with a cafe at ground floor level and is unlikely to have a detrimental visual impact on the streetscape. The former Esat building, in which Mr O’Brien has his penthouse office, is next door at No 1 Grand Canal Quay. Jepview sought planning permission for the 15-storey office block after acquiring the site through a swap deal with Trinity College Dublin. No objections were lodged against the scheme. As part of the conditions attached to the permission, the city council is requiring that Jepview pays €1.54 million in planning contributions towards public infrastructure. Concerns The site currently comprises a single storey warehouse which extends to the full area of the site. In December, the council sought revised plans after expressing “serious concerns in relation to the scale and massing of the proposed building”. In response to the council concerns, architects for the scheme, De Blacam & Meagher Architects made a number of revisions. One of the measures includes incorporating a two and a half storey high winter garden on the top two floors at the western corner of the main block. The adjacent eight storey block will have a roof terrace enclosed by a screen of trees and low shrubs in stainless steel planter boxes. The designers also reduced the width of the main block by 1.7 metres at its western side.