Donegal 2-10 Tyrone 0-12 There was a nervousness in Donegal folk about this one. That feeling only lifted when Jeaic Mac Ceallabhuí, in the final seconds of a tense night, bent down to flick home their second goal. On a night when they needed a win, the bus carrying their old foes from across the border - who just happen to be the reigning All-Ireland champions - was perhaps just what Donegal needed to roll into Ballybofey. Level eight times in all, it was a game that seemed destined to finish level. Donegal, though, found a way. Substitute Oisin Gallen, appearing on his home turf, kicked Donegal in front. Gallen, along with Peadar Mogan, had a role in the move for the clinching goal, with MacCeallabhuí’s finish raising the roof. Donegal stretched their unbeaten run in league games at Sean MacCumhaill Park to 21 - a sequence that goes back 12 years. Donegal were without a score in almost 25 minutes when Conor O’Donnell flicked into the River End net late in the first half. Patrick McBrearty was the engineer, a determined surge opening Tyrone up. McBrearty offloaded across goal for O’Donnell to convert. To say that it was badly needed would be an understatement. Tyrone had popped over the game’s five previous points and it was Donegal’s first score since a 12th minute point by McBrearty. Tyrone assumed control with a flurry of points, including a brace from the marauding corner-back Michael McKernan. Strong start They led for the first time through the towering Conn Kilpatrick in the 15th minute and Tyrone opened up a 0-7 to 0-3 lead. Donegal started the half well - indeed, they ought to have made more of their early play - and they finished likewise. O’Donnell might have had a second goal, but Niall Morgan did well to keep out the Carndonagh man’s effort during a lengthy period of stoppage time, brought about by a nasty injury that saw Pádraig McNulty carried off on a stretcher. Donegal, still without the influences of Michael Murphy and Michael Langan, brought themselves level, 1-4 to 0-7, by half-time, Jason McGee soaring over from long range. Goalkeeper Shaun Patton converted a free while the busy O’Donnell - who was named man of the match - landed three second-half points. Tyrone lost Padraig McNulty to an arm injury but, as is their wont, stayed right in touch. Until, that was, Donegal found the scores. Donegal: S Patton (0-1, one free); C Ward, B McCole, S McMenamin; R McHugh (0-1), E Gallagher, O McFadden-Ferry; H McFadden, J McGee (0-1); S O’Donnell (0-1), P Mogan, C Thompson; P McBrearty (0-2, one free), C O’Donnell (1-3), N O’Donnell. Subs: J Mac Ceallabhuí for N.O’Donnell (36 mins), O Gallen (0-1) for McFadden (59 mins), D Ó Baoill and E O’Donnell for S O’Donnell and McFadden-Ferry (68 mins). Tyrone: N Morgan; M McKernan (0-2), P Hampsey, F Burns; N Sludden, J Munroe (0-1), K McGeary; C Kilpatrick (0-1), B Kennedy; N Donnelly, D Canavan (0-1), C Meyler; D McCurry (0-5, three frees), P McNulty, P Donaghy. Subs: R Donnelly (0-1) for McNulty (22 mins), C McShane (0-1) for Donaghy (56 mins), C McKenna for McGeary (68 mins). Referee: B Cawley (Kildare)