Plans by Red Rock Developments to construct 147 build-to-rent apartments in Glenageary, south Dublin are facing strong local opposition. Last year, Keith Craddock’s Red Rock Glenageary Ltd lodged fast-track plans to An Bord Pleanala for the 147 units across four blocks ranging in height from five to nine storeys in height at the junction of Sallynoggin Road Lower and Glenageary Avenue. More than 80 objections have been lodged against the scheme, including one from local TD Richard Boyd Barrett of People Before Profit Solidarity. Mr Boyd Barrett states that the height and scale of the development at nine storeys is inappropriate for the site. He contends that the scheme will tower over the cottages on Parnell and Sarsfield streets and the two-storey buildings in the rest of the surrounding area. The TD for the Dun Laoghaire constituency argues the build-to-rent tenure of the planned apartments “will do nothing to provide much needed affordable homes in the area”. The Bellevue, Glenageary and Rochestown Residents Association contend that the overbearing and excessive size of the development will have a negative and injurious effect on the adjacent residential properties. The associations contend that the scheme is highly inappropriate and unsuitable in a settled and mature setting of primarily one- and two-storey houses and cottages. The Greythorn Park Residents Association claims that build-to-rent developments do not encourage a sense of belonging on the part of the tenants to the area. Height concerns The association said the scheme was several storeys too high and that the tallest building of the proposed development at nine storeys would ensure that mountain views would be blocked. Planning consultants for the project, Hughes Planning and Development Consultants, told An Bord Pleanala that the timely delivery of suburban housing on the site was appropriate and accords with the national focus on development, in response to the housing crisis. Kevin Hughes stated that the scheme was located on residentially-zoned land in an existing urban settlement and was adjacent to existing infrastructure and services. Mr Hughes has stated that the positioning of the nine-storey element had been arranged to offer maximum separation from any adjoining amenities, which could be considered sensitive. A decision due on the scheme in April