The island of Ireland could host a quarter of the games in Euro 2028 under a proposed joint bid to host the football tournament with England, Scotland and Wales. The Cabinet is expected to be updated on Tuesday on the decision by the five football associations across Britain and Ireland to pursue the European Championships rather than the 2030 World Cup. The Government here is waiting for more information on the costs and benefits of hosting before making a decision to support efforts to land the tournament. However, Minister of State for Sport Jack Chambers is due to brief ministerial colleagues on the current status of the planned bid by the Football Association of Ireland (FAI) and its counterparts in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Issues still under consideration include the costs that may occur depending on the size of the tournament and whether there will be 24 teams or an increase to 32 – something that has been mooted by Uefa. This would factor into how many games would be held in Ireland, but there is an expectation a quarter of the matches overall would be played on both sides of the Border if the bid were to go ahead and be successful. The potential bid is being positively viewed within government, including the potential to strengthen North-South and east-west ties. The State had spent about €155,000 on scoping out a potential joint bid for the 2030 World Cup before that proposal was dropped by the five football associations in favour of pursuing Euro 2028. Sources said the feasibility work can be repurposed. The Cabinet is not expected to make a decision on Tuesday, but the bid will have to be signed off before March 23rd, the Uefa deadline for expressions of interest from potential host countries. Covid measures Separately, the Government is set to give approval on the dropping of almost all remaining Covid-19 measures. Ministers are expected to agree to recommendations by the National Public Health Emergency Team (Nphet) that the requirement for the compulsory wearing of face masks on public transport as well as in schools and shops can be dropped from February 28th. Nphet said last week masks should still be worn in healthcare settings and people should still be advised to wear them on public transport. Taoiseach Micheál Martin has already said the Government is following Nphet’s advice “in its entirety”. Minister for Children Roderic O’Gorman is to seek Government approval for the publication of draft legislation to allow for the exhumation of remains at the sites of former mother and baby homes. Survivors and the families of former residents are to be briefed on the contents of the Institutional Burials Bill before it is published. There is said to be “substantial changes” to a previous version of the legislation. Minister for Agriculture Charlie McConalogue is expected to bring proposals for a €7 million support package for pig farmers to help the embattled sector, which has had to cope with rising feed and energy costs alongside a drop in the price received for pigs in the market. A support package worth about €20,000 per farmer is to be paid to all pig farmers who are members of the Bord Bia quality assurance scheme. Nuclear option Minister for Finance Paschal Donohoe will update his Cabinet colleagues on Ireland’s consideration of EU proposals to classify energy from nuclear and gas powered plants as sustainable. The controversial proposal, which is being discussed at European Council and at member state level, would see such power plants classified as “green” in guidelines for sustainable investment, but has sparked a backlash, including from some member states. Minister for the Environment Eamon Ryan has said there is no need to classify nuclear and gas along these lines. Mr Ryan will also bring amendments to the Road Traffic and Roads Bill that will also allow the Road Safety Authority to provide car owners with online access to their NCT data. The change would also allow prospective buyers of second-hand cars to view the information if the seller was willing to share it with them. Data protection issues have been overcome as no personal data is used.