Ministers have approved plans to remove almost all Covid related restrictions on Monday. Under a plan that went to Cabinet on Tuesday, all legal requirements to wear masks will expire after February 28th, with their use only required in healthcare settings. People will be advised to exercise their own judgement on the use of masks in schools, in retail settings and on public transport. Tánaiste Leo Varadkar said there were also “significant changes” on testing. People with symptoms who are under 55 or those over that age who are boosted and in good health are no longer required to get tested. Those who are over 55 and not boosted, pregnant women and people who are immuno-compromised or have high risk medical conditions should still get Covid tests. People with confirmed cases of Covid-19 must still self-isolate. However,close contact are no longer required to restrict movement or self-isolate unless they have symptoms from Monday. Mr Varadkar said Cabinet agreed to accept the advice of the National Public Health Emergency Team (Nphet) and he described the changes as the next steps towards living with Covid-19 as an endemic disease. While mask mandates would end on Monday as a legal requirement, he said the wearing of masks was still being advised on public transport and in healthcare settings. He said people who still wished to wear masks were free to do so. In schools and childcare pods for children, staggered breaks and physical distancing can also end from Monday. These settings will still be required to practice good hygiene and have good ventilation and children should stay at home if they are sick. Mr Varadkar said Nphet recommended that there be no vaccine mandates either for the general public or healthcare workers and the Government has agreed with this. Global effort Meanwhile, Ireland could more than double its contributions to global efforts to vaccinate people against Covid-19 under proposals being examined by Government. Plans to donate up to 3.3 million more jabs are being developed by Minister for Health Stephen Donnelly with a view to being finalised in the coming weeks. Ireland - which has high levels of vaccination it is own population - has already donated or pledged around three million doses. Mr Donnelly is understood to be examining how further contributions can be made with a source saying he is “keen to see greater vaccine equity and solidarity” especially with the African continent. Under the proposals Ireland will maintain sufficient vaccine stocks to cater for the current vaccination programme and any possible further vaccine roll-out later this year. However, Mr Donnelly is said to be authorising a waiver of additional vaccine options on 1.7 million doses which will be donated as part of an EU-wide donation of Janssen vaccines. The possibility of donating a further 1.1 million donation of Janssen vaccines - due in Ireland in the second quarter of 2022 - is also being examined. Almost half a million Pfizer and Moderna vaccines that are already in Ireland - and have a shelf life of at least July onwards - may also be donated on a bilateral basis with other countries.