Dublin 2-16 Tipperary 0-21 Goals from Rian McBride and Ronan Hayes did the trick for Dublin who scored a rare win in Thurles to move into top spot in Division 1B of the Allianz Hurling League table. In difficult conditions with high winds and sheeting rain, Donal Burke’s 60th minute point from a free ultimately separated the teams. That score put the visiting Dubs, who’d only won three of their previous 10 league and Championship games at Semple Stadium throughout the last decade, five points clear. The Walsh Cup winners needed the cushion too as hosts Tipp reeled off the last four points of the game to move within one. Subs Noel McGrath and Conor Bowe scored two of those points while top scorer Jason Forde, who hit 0-12 overall, was also on the mark. But Tipp couldn’t rescue a draw with both captain Ronan Maher and Forde failing to convert late opportunities. The result sees Dublin leapfrog Tipp into pole position in the table ahead of next Saturday’s clash with Kilkenny at Parnell Park. Tipp will have an opportunity to bounce back when they travel to play Waterford a day later. Boss Colm Bonnar won’t lose too much sleep about the setback as conditions were terrible and his side fought to the bitter end. Tipp were also much changed from the side that beat Kilkenny in round two with only seven starters retained. Bonnar handed game time to eight players - Barry Hogan, Brian McGrath, Eoghan Connolly, Robert Byrne, Seamus Callanan, Noel McGrath, John McGrath and Bowe - who hadn’t featured in this season’s league and he has now looked at 28 players in total. Former Hurler of the Year Callanan was well shackled by Dubs captain Eoghan O’Donnell though Tipp still raced 0-6 to 0-2 clear initially. Dublin were undermined by 10 first-half wides but improved in the second quarter and outscored Tipp by 1-6 to 0-4 in that period to lead by 1-8 to 0-10 at half-time. McBride’s goal was a beauty as he powered through on the right and slammed a shot beyond Barry Hogan. Tipp improved after the restart with Jake Morris, who had a thrilling tussle with Andrew Dunphy, registering two of the four points that the 2008 league winners reeled off. Just like the first-half, Dublin came roaring back with a series of scores and another goal, this time from Hayes, who got his shot away from the right endline after a probing run. The goal left Dublin 2-14 to 0-15 clear and they retained that five-point lead with 10 minutes remaining - a cushion that was to be vital as Tipp rallied. Dublin: S Brennan; A Dunphy, E O’Donnell, C O’Callaghan; J Bellew, P Smyth, J Madden (0-1); C Burke (0-1), C Crummey; D Burke (0-9, 0-8 frees), R McBride (1-2), D Sutcliffe; F Whitely (0-2), R Hayes (1-1), A Mellett. Subs: E Dillon for Hayes (58 mins), D Keogh for Whitely (64 mins), J Malone for McBride, P Crummey for Mellett (both 67 mins). Tipperary: Barry Hogan; E Connolly, B McGrath, C Morgan; R Byrne (0-2), S Kennedy, R Maher; A Flynn, P Cadell; D McCormack, J Forde (0-12, 0-11 frees, 0-1 sideline), M Breen (0-1); P Flynn (0-1), S Callanan, J Morris (0-3). Subs: N McGrath (0-1) for Cadell, J McGrath for Callanan (both 55 mins), C Bowe (0-1) for Flynn (62 mins). Referee: J Murphy (Limerick).