Leinster v Lions, RDS (7.35, live on TG4, Premier Sports) Leinster confirmed one of the worst kept secrets in Irish rugby by confirming the signing of Jason Jenkins for next season, one of three contract announcements on the day with Rhys Ruddock - he makes his 200th appearance for the province at the RDS on Friday night - and prop Michael Milne also putting pen to paper. The 26-year-old, six foot eight inch, Jenkins, who has one cap for the Springboks, will bring much needed size and power to Leinster’s secondrow resources. The South African has been bedevilled by injury during his time with Munster but hopes to accumulate much needed game time before the end of the season. Leinster head coach Leo Cullen said: “He’s a big physical man, for starters and then you have age profile and experience. I saw him play first at Under-20s, believe it or not, at the World Cup in Italy and he progressed through Super Rugby with the Bulls and he stood out many times. “I have had a few conversations with Jason as well so we are excited to get him. It’s a different dynamic for our group. We have lots of players who have come through the system here so to have someone with different experience from outside the group and with a good age profile as well (will be good). He has been coached by Jake White as well, for example, so there is plenty we can learn from.” Changes Cullen has retained just six of the starting team from the side that beat the Ospreys 29-7 last weekend. The return of Dan Leavy - he picked up a head injury against Ulster in November and then required surgery to a hand issue sustained in training - is a welcome fillip for the player. He is joined in the backrow by Josh Murphy and Ruddock, who captains the side on his milestone appearance. Devin Toner extends his Leinster record with a 274th cap while his partner in the secondrow Joe McCarthy wins a second, having made his debut in the defeat to Cardiff. The former age-grade international is a fine prospect. Another young player who makes the starting team is 21-year-old Max O’Reilly named at fullback in the absence of Hugo Keenan and Jimmy O’Brien, both of whom are away with Ireland. Cullen has opted for a six-two split on the bench. He explained the decision: “There is a risk there but with some versatility in Harry Byrne and Jamie Osborne who can shift around which is important. We need a bit more grunt but maybe some of the backrowers might fancy playing in the backline,” he smiled. The Lions are a different group personnel to the squads that reached three Super Rugby finals but there are certain elements of their game that haven’t changed including a superb set-piece and powerful, direct carrying game, characteristics that have caused Leinster problems in the past; albeit that the home side should still have enough to prevail. Leinster: M O’Reilly; T O’Brien, J Osborne, H Byrne, D Kearney; R Byrne, N McCarthy; E Byrne, J Tracy, M Ala’alatoa; D Toner, J McCarthy; J Murphy, D Leavy, R Ruddock. Replacements: S Cronin, P Dooley, T Clarkson, J Dunne, M Deegan, L McGrath, A Byrne, S Penny. Lions: Q Horn; S Pienaar; W Simelane, B Odendaal, E van der Merwe; J Hendrikse, M van der Berg; S Sithole, J Visagie, C Sadie; PJ Steenkamp, R Schoeman; J Kriel, R Venter, F Horn. Replacements: PJ Botha, M Naude, R Dreyer, L Ncube, S Sangweni, N Steyn, M Rass, T Swanepoel. Referee: C Evans (Wales)