Mayo play their 600th league match this weekend when Armagh come to Dr Hyde Park - MacHale Park in Castlebar being still unavailable because of renovations. According to a press release from county PRO, John Walker, the county has faced Armagh on only 14 occasions, starting just 42 years ago. “Their most frequent opponents have been Kerry who they have met on 50 occasions, with Galway 48, Dublin 38, Meath 37 and Sligo 35 being next in line. “At the other end of the scale, they have never played either London or Waterford in the league, while they have met Wicklow, Kilkenny and Carlow on just two occasions. Mayo have played Armagh on 14 occasions in the league with the record standing at Armagh with eight wins, Mayo with four wins and there were two draws.” Mayo have won the competition 12 times, including a six-in-a-row from 1934 to ‘39, most recently in 2019. For this weekend’s encounter, manager James Horan makes four changes to the side that beat Dublin and maintained their status as joint-leaders on Division One. Frank Irwin of Ballina Stephenites is selected to make his debut. He is a son of the county’s former All Star goalkeeper Gabriel. His club-mate Sam Callinan makes his first start of the campaign, having come on against Donegal in the opening match. They replace Paul Towey and Donnacha McHugh, respectively. NUIG Sigerson winner Fionn McDonagh comes in for Bryan Walsh at right wing forward whereas on the other wing Conor Loftus replaces Jack Carney, who scored the first goal against Dublin last Saturday. All four replaced or rotated players are named on a strong bench, featuring All Stars Brendan Harrison, Paddy Durcan and Aidan O’Shea. Mayo: Rob Hennelly; Lee Keegan, Rory Brickenden, Michael Plunkett; Oisín Mullin, Stephen Coen (capt), Sam Callinan; Jordan Flynn, Matthew Ruane; Fionn McDonagh, Diarmuid O’Connor, Conor Loftus; Aiden Orme, Frank Irwin, Ryan O’Donoghue. Subs: Rory Byrne, Donnacha McHugh, Brendan Harrison, Paddy Durcan, Pádraig O’Hora, Conor O’Shea, Aidan O’Shea, Kevin McLoughlin, Paul Towey, Jack Carney, Fergal Boland.