15 Michael Lowry - Didn’t go for many high balls but showed what pace can do when he beat Juan Brex for his try on 30 minutes, then another. Looked comfortable. Rating: 8 14 Mack Hansen - Loves the work rate and was able to keep himself involved as well as displaying surety under the high ball. Exudes threat which is essential for a winger. Rating: 8 13 Garry Ringrose - Took punishment early on and had a timeout for a head cut. Like Henshaw played well and contested everything but there’s more inside. Rating: 8 12 Robbie Henshaw - As ever a brave and athletic showing in the centre. Maybe would have liked something more high profile against a 13 man Italy. Rating: 7 11 James Lowe - He plays every game with the same enthusiastic show of emotion. Rock solid under high balls. Wasn’t shy on the try scoring either. Rating: 8 10 Joey Carbery - Not a bad game at all with a try to his name. Left the kicking boots behind with two from five but welcome minutes for the understudy. Rating: 7 9 Jamison Gibson Park - Brings a tempo to the Irish play that suits the way Andy Farrell wants to play Test rugby. Wispy and fast to the breakdown and a try to boot. Rating: 8 1 Andrew Porter - Brought his typical strength and dynamic force to both the tackle area and making those hard yards in the middle of the pitch. Rating: 8 2 Dan Sheehan - Showing Farrell that he is up to the job with Ronan Kelleher out for sometime. He’s been a find with a nicely paced pass for Carbery’s try. Rating: 8 3 Tadhg Furlong - Concentrated on the hard industrial stuff. With the uncontested scrums because Italy lost both hookers detracted from the overall contest. Rating: 8 4 Tadhg Beirne - Lineout work good and ball carrying a huge asset, he also proved his ability to turnover ball has not diminished. A strong performance. Rating: 9 5 Ryan Baird - Athletic in the secondrow Baird got around the pitch well as he always does. Will be pleased with contribution and block down try at the end of the match. Rating: 8 6 Peter O’Mahony - His try in the corner raised quite a roar. Typically working hard where it goes unseen. Stretched his legs too in the second half. Rating: 7 7 Josh van der Flier - Another outstanding game from the openside at the breakdown and with frequent carries, which have become a point of difference in his game. Rating: 9 8 Caelan Doris - Excellent at taking ball back to the opposition and his lineout work was again one of Ireland’s strengths. A busy day well negotiated. Rating: 8 Replacements - Johnny Sexton and Craig Casey brought their games and influenced most off the bench. Again against 13 players it was only going one way. Still the scoreboard kept turning. Rating: 8 Coach - Andy Farrell will be pleased although others might crow about putting on a bigger show against a reduced Italian side. Still, Ireland got the job done with 50 plus points. Rating: 7