SSE Airtricity is Ireland’s largest provider of 100 per cent green energy* and has been helping businesses all over Ireland to transition to more sustainable energy solutions. That includes everything from small businesses to large industry leaders. Since 2008 it has invested over €3 billion into greening Ireland’s energy infrastructure and, as society moves to a net zero future, SSE has committed to investing a further £12.5 billion up to 2026 in clean energy projects across the UK and Ireland. As a green energy solutions provider, it is committed to supporting businesses in reducing their emissions, and helping them on their journeys to net zero. The company recently joined forces with Microsoft and is using the power of data science, AI, and digital technology to empower others to reduce their carbon footprint and together help address climate change. Through this partnership they were able to advance this climate commitment by installing internet-connected solar panels in 29 primary and secondary schools across Ireland. The innovative project enables each school to power classrooms using energy generated from its own roof, reducing both its carbon footprint and its costs. The solar panels are connected to Microsoft’s Azure cloud, which aggregates real time data and determines the carbon emissions saved. “It’s a unique project, a first-of-its-kind pilot to prove the viability of distributed energy generation power purchase agreements and open up the energy-saving and carbon reduction potential of rooftop solar across the country,” explains Conor Kelly, sustainability technology lead at Microsoft. “While providing immediate results for schools across Ireland, and equipping them with new data-driven insights from Microsoft’s Azure cloud on how to reduce their carbon footprint and ultimately save money, the project represents a blueprint that can be used across the energy sector not only in Ireland but across the world,” he adds. To help foster sustainable practices inside and outside the school gate, Microsoft and SSE Airtricity also developed an educational programme for the participating schools. The three-part syllabus covers renewable energy, sustainability, and technology. These courses help to educate and inform young people about the challenges posed by climate change and the role technology can play in creating more sustainable communities across Ireland. “The solar panels can generate enough electricity for 68 Irish homes for a full year and thereby help to reduce the carbon footprint of the community in which each school is located,” says Kelly. The schools project will produce enough clean energy over the next 15 years to offset more than 2.1 million kilograms of harmful Co2 emissions. For Microsoft, SSE Airtricity was an obvious choice. “We have a great history of working to provide SSE with the digital tools required to optimise the roll-out of renewable energy to their customers. In 2020 we very successfully joined forces with them to support the installation of cutting-edge green technology at Ireland’s only children’s hospice, Laura Lynn, in an effort to help it to dramatically reduce its annual energy costs. We strongly believed that SSE Airtricity was perfectly positioned to help roll out this innovative project with us,” says Kelly. Services for business As Ireland’s largest supplier of 100 per cent green energy*, SSE Airtricity is powering businesses of all sizes around Ireland from renewable sources such as its 28 onshore wind farms, including Galway Wind Park, Ireland’s largest windfarm. Through the government’s Energy Efficiency Obligation Scheme, SSE Airtricity also provides a range of supports for projects in businesses across Ireland which aim to reduce their long-term energy consumption in favour of a more sustainable approach. “We have a range of green energy services available and rather than a one-size-fits-all approach, we work with each of our business customers to address their individual needs,” says Fergal Ahern, SSE Airtricity’s head of business development. “Depending on whether the business is on a sustainability journey or a cost savings journey, there are a number of solutions we can provide that can help them, with very limited upfront investment.” The key starting point for any business is to see how it is currently using energy. SSE Airtricity can help businesses to undertake an energy audit, grants for which are available from the SEAI to help cover the cost. “The audit shows exactly where your energy demand is coming from so that you can make behavioural and technical changes, such as switching energy usage to different times and installing energy efficient equipment to make savings,” he explains. To reduce costs further, SSE Airtricity can provide LED lighting upgrades. “Our lighting-as-a-service (LaaS) product means you can get an LED lighting upgrade at no upfront cost to the business but instead spread the cost and pay for it via monthly bills over two or three years,” he explains. The new lighting will pay for itself in savings over time while providing immediate CSR benefits, he points out. A switch to energy-efficient LED lighting can use up to 90 per cent less energy than traditional lighting, according to the SEAI. For medium and large business customers, SSE Airtricity offers a funded solar solutions project in the form of a five- or 10-year contract with no upfront cost. As well as the potential for immediate savings and CSR benefits, it provides businesses with the comfort of long-term energy hedge, which can protect against market volatility. Medium to large businesses can benefit from the new demand-side response (DSR) product. These are perfectly suited to those who have demand flexibility. If you are in a position to switch off part or all of your demand for a period of time, at short notice, you can avail of cash payments. The ability to do that creates a virtual power plant of customers, helping to take demand off the grid at peak times. Companies with backup generators or battery storage solutions on site can avail of this too. “SSE Airtricity was also first to market with a digital solution that allows small and medium sized business customers to sign up online, using just their MRPN (Meter Point Reference Number), hassle free. That gives business users the same flexibility and ability to switch providers as residential customers,” says Ahern. SSE Airtricity is also helping businesses through the installation of workplace EV charging and fleet charging solutions. Ireland needs to achieve a 51 per cent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2030, and to reach net zero emissions by 2050. “Business has a huge part to play in helping Ireland reach its energy reduction targets. At SSE, we’re ready to work with businesses and provide the energy solutions needed to achieve this,” Ahern says. Switching to SSE Airtricity is a positive decision that is good for your business, good for your customers and good for the planet. Find out more about how SSE Airtricity can help power your business - sseairtricity.com/ie/business For online sign up visit sseairtricity.com/ie/business/products-services/small-business/online-signup/ * Source: Largest provider of 100% green energy supplied to homes and businesses based on Electricity Market Share by total tWh, published by the Commission for Regulation of Utilities (CRU) in most recent Annual Energy and Water Monitoring Report for 2020, published in November 2021.