Gas demand rose 11 per cent in January, new data showed, as temperatures dropped and people beagn returning to offices after Christmas. Three days during the month were recorded as among the top 30 for daily demand in the past 12 years. Most commercial sectors saw a rise compared to December, including manufacturing, which rose 21 per cent, a 17 per cent increase in power generation and a 15 per cent increase in demand from education. Office demand was 10 per cent higher, and the pharmaceutical sector increased 10 per cent. Year on year, overall gas demand in January was down 6 per cent . In January 2021, gas demand reached the highest monthly level in more than a decade, and was the third highest ever. Retail and laundry showed the biggest increases in demand in January year on year, at 62 per cent and 51 per cent respectively, as Covid-19 restrictions eased. with an easing of Covid-19 restrictions compared to the same time last year. Gas remained the primary source of electricity generation last month at 45 per cent, compared to coal’s 14 per cent. At its peak, gas accoounted for 74 per cent of electricity generation, with a low of 12 per cent. Coal peaked at 25 per cent with a low of 6 per cent. Wind energy provided 68 per cent of Ireland’s electricity on New Year’s Day, but fell away during the rest of the month, generated 33 per cent of total electricity demand for the month. That was a decrease of seven percentage points month on month. Wind generated up to 76 per cent of Ireland’s electricity during January at its peak, but hit a low of 1 per cent at times. “Although it was a windy start to the year, gas’s share of electricity generation climbed on December’s total, powering 45 per cent of Ireland’s electricity and again highlighting the essential role that gas plays in our energy mix and in complementing intermittent renewable electricity sources,” said Gas Networks Ireland’s head of regulatory affairs, Brian Mullins. “January has been a consistently high month for gas demand. In January 2021, we saw it reach the highest monthly level in over a decade and the third highest level ever. Although down 6 per cent this year, there were three days during January 2022 when demand for gas closed amongst the top 30 for daily demand recorded in 12 years.”