Bad luck, a sour taste on the tongue: the squally rain relentlessly splattered down on Shane Lowry as he appraised his final shots of the Honda Classic at PGA National in Palm Beach, Florida, in a dramatic finale to the tournament where he ultimately came up short. While Daniel Berger had started out as a red-hot favourite, the local Floridian endured a nightmare final round start - dropping four shots inside his opening six holes - that brought his pursuers into the picture and Lowry’s bogey-free round enabled him to leapfrog his way up the leaderboard. But, just not enough. Instead, it was Austria’s Sepp Straka - who shot a final round 66 for 270, 10-under-par - who claimed a breakthrough win on the PGA Tour. Lowry went bogey-free on his final round but fell victim in a way to the arrival of a weather front on his homeward run which went against him. Lowry’s 67 for a total of 271 gave him a solo runner-up finish. Lowry started the final round five shots adrift of Berger but had moved into outright lead with an error-free front nine run with birdies on the first and fourth and a further birdie on the 11th only to par his way home. For a time, it looked as if Lowry was destined to claim the title and the Offalyman went two shots in front coming down the stretch. And, then, it didn’t happen, as he fell victim to a rain squall that changed the dynamics of the finale. Breakthrough Straka, though, stole the show as the first Austrian winner on the PGA Tour who finished with three birdies on his closing five holes for 66 for 270 that gave him a one stroke winning margin over Lowry: “I really don’t know how to feel right now, as a PGA Tour winner,” said Sraka of his breakthrough win on the circuit. In the Jonsson Workwear Open - a co-sanctioned event on the Challenge Tour and the Sunshine Tour in Durban - JC Rtchie claimed back-to-back wins with a final round 71 for a 26-under-par total of 260, six shots clear of runner-up Chris Mivis. Northern Irish teenager Tom McKibbin shot a final round 72 for 271 to finish in tied-seventh, while John Murphy had a 69 for 274 in tied-18th.