Not only is Netwatch the original in the proactive video monitoring sector, it is the market leader, staying ahead of its competition through constantly evolving its propriety software and using AI technology. The company combines the best technology in the industry with a team  dedicated to customer service and the prevention of crime against the premises and sites it protects. When Netwatch was established in Carlow in 2003, there was no one else offering a proactive video monitoring service. It has spent nearly two decades developing and enhancing its service and can confidently say they provide a superior service in their industry. Netwatch revolutionised the Irish security market by introducing the first “real time” remote visual monitoring system that, unlike static security cameras, allows for immediate intervention when the security perimeter is breached. This provides immediate, preventative and cost-effective solutions for clients. The company is now a world leader in proactive video monitoring, with a stated mission “to create a fearless environment” in which  clients feel safe and secure in their business. Netwatch’s success is due to a combination of factors. It has been driven not only by outstanding technology, but by the collective experience of a team of professional and enthusiastic people. This close-knit team collaborating internally, with customers and within the global security industry, has enabled the leading proactive video monitoring service provided today. So proud is Netwatch of its team that it has made them the focus of a new promotional campaign: “The Original”. Here some members of the team describe their work that contributes to the Netwatch success. Their roles illustrate the depth of experience and commitment Netwatch clients can expect. Colin Hayes, head of Business Ireland & UK, solutions specialist “For 20 years I have worked with our clients to create safe environments. My job is to listen, understand the risks and resolve them. We know how to take security pain away from our clients.” Colin has been part of the Netwatch story for nearly 20 years. Much of his time has been surveying sites and helping clients overcome their security issues and fears. Through his experience, and the close relationship he has built up with clients, he truly understands what is important and how to remove the worry of security from people’s lives. Colin brings this experience to the rest of the Netwatch team, who all strive to create a fearless environment for clients. Des O’Brien, security engineer “Having installed thousands of systems for Netwatch clients, my favourite part of the job is seeing the relief on a customer’s face when the installation is complete. They finally feel safe.” Des has been securing clients premises with Netwatch for 15 years. He has been part of the evolution of the Netwatch service, having worked with security technology from its early development to the amazing options available today. Not only does Des have a wealth of experience with security systems, but also the experience of working with clients for more than five, 10 and 15 years. He will ensure they have an effective system to meet their growing needs. Susan Morris, intervention specialist “I have intervened in thousands of incidents on customer sites over the years, deterring intruders before any damage is done. I know how to read a situation and keep our customers safe.” The time Susan has spent monitoring and protecting Netwatch clients means she understands the intricacies of site security and what to look out for. Netwatch’s intervention specialists undergo in-depth training to ensure they are prepared to deal with all situations effectively. The team in the Netwatch monitoring hubs have years of experience and a real a commitment to client safety. The collective experience across the team enables the most skilful, caring and effective monitoring team who know how to react in all situations. Liz Maher, quality assurance lead “I love being part of the inhouse R&D team at Netwatch. We listen to our customers and develop technology that adapts to their evolving needs. Seeing homegrown Netwatch technology being deployed globally makes me proud.” Netwatch is only one in their industry to develop its own proprietary software platform. Over the past 20 years, the  in-house research and development department has worked to progress the Netwatch platform by listening to its customers and developing technology that evolves with customer needs. Through the R&D team’s technological advancement of the Netwatch software, the company has achieved an industry-leading track record. The Netwatch software has enabled the prevention of more than 80,000 crimes to date. The role of Liz and the R&D team is to make life easier, and more secure, for Netwatch clients. Sean Swan, client A testimonial from an original Netwatch client is special, and reflects what many others say. Swan’s Electrical Expert, based in Co Carlow, is owned by Sean Swan. “I never worry about our security because we use Netwatch,” he says. “We have trusted their people and their technology to protect us for almost 20 years.” Swan’s Electrical was one of the first Netwatch clients. Both companies have come a long way in that time. Sean has moved locations and expanded, with Netwatch ensuring a safe environment throughout the journey. Like many Netwatch clients, Sean’s journey with them began following frightening and unsafe encounters with criminals at his business premises. Sean says one of the reasons he has remained with Netwatch is because all that fear has gone away and he can sleep soundly at night. He leaves the security to Netwatch while he gets on with growing his business. Sean would definitely say, “Put your security in the hands of the original.” Netwatch Group Formed in 2003, Netwatch  is now part of the Netwatch Group, which was formed in 2018 following the merger of leading monitoring companies, including NMC (US), CalAtlantic (US) and Netwatch (Ireland/UK). Backed by The Riverside Company, a global private equity firm, the Netwatch Group protects more than  300,000 sites in a variety of sectors, including government, critical infrastructure, manufacturing, education, retail and residential. It operates a network of five Monitoring Hubs connected by its proprietary technology platform. For more information, go to netwatchsystems.com