Taoiseach Micheál Martin has condemned the Russian attack on Ukraine as indefensible. In his first response to military offensive, Mr Martin on Thursday said that Russia would pay a “high price for the act of aggression”. Ukraine’s president has declared martial law and urged citizens not to panic as Russia launched military strikes on the country, while the country’s foreign minister called it a “full-scale invasion”. Russian president Vladimir Putin announced the action during a televised address early on Thursday morning, saying the move was a response to threats from Ukraine. Mr Martin said: “I utterly condemn, in the strongest possible terms, Russia’s indefensible attack on the sovereign people of Ukraine. “Our first thoughts are with them. We will work with our EU partners at at the UN to hold President (Vladimir) Putin and his regime accountable. “Russia will pay a high price for this outrageous act of aggression. We stand by Ukraine,” he said. Minister for Foreign Affairs Simon Coveney said Russia’s military operation in Ukraine was a “shocking murderous act of aggression against a sovereign peaceful state”. “God help them. Rocket attacks and explosions across the country... EU and world needs to respond strongly,” he tweeted this morning. Minister Coveney said his thoughts and prayers are with the people of Ukraine. “Russian leaders are lying to their own people to justify this illegal aggression. We utterly condemn Russia for this act of unjustifiable war in the heart of Europe. ” Minister Coveney added that the Irish diplomatic team in Kyiv had moved to a safe place and his department is staying in close contact with them. “We are working with EU colleagues to ensure their safety.” At an emergency UN Security Council meeting, Ireland condemned the decision of Russia to launch a military operation and called on security council members to “assume their responsibility and to speak out in the strongest possible terms about this act of aggression”, according to the Minister. All Irish citizens currently in Ukraine should seek shelter in a secure place, a new update from the Department of Foreign Affairs recommended. The Department advised citizens against moving around the country in the coming hours and to follow the advice of local authorities. Any travel to Ukraine at this time is not recommended, the Department added.