Road safety concerns have put paid to plans for a 233-unit residential scheme for Enniscorthy in Co Wexford. This follows An Bord Pleanála refusing planning permission to Torca Developments Ltd for the €120 million housing scheme made up of 180 apartments and 53 houses on lands east of Carley’s Bridge, Enniscorthy. The board refused permission after concluding that the scheme for a site 1km west of Enniscorthy “would endanger public safety by reason of traffic hazard”. The board stated that it had fundamental road safety concerns relating to the proposed provision of a raised table on the Carley’s Bridge Road in place of a dedicated footpath and uncertainty over the future speed limit for the road where there will be an exit/entrance from the housing scheme. The board endorsed the recommendation of its inspector, Rónán O’Connor, to refuse permission on the single road safety issue. An Bord Pleanála has previously refused permission for housing schemes on parts of the overall site that had been granted by Wexford County Council. The council recommended a grant of permission concerning this new Strategic Housing Development (SHD) application. Torca Developments is part of the Dublin-based Torca Homes that is led by Phelim and Oisin O’Connor. The board received 28 submissions including objections from the Millbrook Residents’ Association and residents of Potters Way. Residents expressed concerns over the height of the proposed four-storey blocks, the density of the scheme and that the development was incongruous with the character of the area. A planning report lodged with the application stated, however, that “the proposed development would provide an appropriate form of high-quality residential development for this substantial residential zoned site providing for an efficient use of lands”. Apart from his road safety concern, the planning inspector concluded that the proposed residential scheme was acceptable in principle at the site. Mr O’Connor also found that the density, height, bulk and massing, detailed design and layout of the scheme were acceptable. “I am also satisfied that the development would not have any significant adverse impacts on the residential amenities of the surrounding area,” he said.