Ardaire Springs Angling Centre in Mooncoin, Co. Kilkenny has announced it will host its first Irish Spring Angling Fair over the May Bank Holiday weekend on Saturday April 30th and Sunday May 1st, 2022. Throughout the two days, some renowned names will deliver talks on angling-related topics and provide free demonstrations. These include Scott Mackenzie, Glenda Powell, Peter Driver, Paul Procter, Henry Gilbey, Jim Clohessy, Rupert Harvey, John Maduro, Jimmy Tyrrell, Sean Deeney, Denis O’Toole, Cathal Hughes, Jason O’Riordan, Maurice Cahill, Colm Walsh, Ronan Murray, Stuart Wylie, Steffan Jones and Craig Barr. The fly-casting competitions will give anglers an opportunity to showcase their skills to the wider audience and win some fabulous prizes, with double-handed and single-handed amateur competitions on both days. The event promises to offer something for everyone and the game, sea and coarse angling fraternity will be comprehensively covered in all aspects. Ardaire Springs covers over four acres of lakes and is stocked with rainbow and brown trout, ranging from 2lb to 20lb. It also provides a unique occasion for celebrity anglers to showcase their skills and leading tackle manufactures to promote their fishing tackle and boats on the lakes. With plenty of room for exhibitors, the fair will offer an opportunity to add to your tackle collection and discover the latest tips and techniques. All facets of angling will be on display, from tackle suppliers and promotional stands to international companies promoting angling holidays. The younger generation will have an abundance of activities to enjoy, including fly-casting and fly-tying lessons. Ample free parking and onsite catering will also be available. Proprietor Ned Maher added: “Join us and support the first ever fair at Ardaire Springs Angling Centre and see it develop for future years.” For further details, visit irishspringanglingfair.com or check out Facebook. Trout world cup is back Following a meeting of the organising committee, it has been decided to go ahead with the five-day World Cup Trout Fly Angling Competition on Lough Mask again this year after a two- year absence due to Covid. It has also been decided to make a change to the timing of the event, which will commence on Wednesday July 27th with the first of four heat days. The final will be on Sunday July 31st. The reason for change in dates are twofold. Firstly, it means qualifying competitors will still have the Bank Holiday Monday (August 1st) available for travel home. Secondly, in recent years inclement weather has forced the committee to postpone the final on two occasions, and by leaving the Bank Holiday Monday free, the committee will have an extra option available. “The competition was first held in 1953, has a long history in the Lough Mask and Ballinrobe area and has been responsible for the introduction of thousands of anglers to Cushlough Bay over the years,” PRO Denis Kelleher, said. Fly-fishing in Africa Farlows Travel has teamed up with Mavungana Fly Fishing to offer a unique African fly-fishing adventure, set in two locations in Southern Africa targeting two celebrated species: the acrobatic tigerfish and the mystical largemouth yellowfish. The itinerary will see anglers drifting down the famous Orange River and making camp on the riverside each night before heading to the Pongola Game Reserve in search of tigerfish. The offer also includes the Pongola tiger fishing as a shorter, standalone trip or to be combined with other African adventures. To find out more, contact Roddy Hall at roderic.hall@farlowstravel.com. If you have an angling story to share, please send to me at angling@irishtimes.com