Derry City 2 Shamrock Rovers 1 Derry City stunned champions Shamrock Rovers at a breezy Brandywell on Friday night, the home side celebrating a late, late victory thanks to the effort of striker Jamie McGonigle The goal, which claimed the club’s opening win of the season, was sublime both in its creation and the finishing strike. McGonigle outwitted Rovers defender, Roberto Lopez when challenging for a high ball and having won the race for possession he crashed his shot high into the Rovers net giving goalkeeper, Alan Mannus no chance. With the elements favouring Derry in an end-to-end opening period, they looked dangerous. However, they failed to force Mannus into a serious save in the first half. However, Rovers threatened in the 16th minute when Jack Byrne sent Rory Gaffney scampering clear on the right but his shot was superbly parried over the crossbar by home goalkeeper, Brian Maher. Derry went close when Brandon Kavanagh’s corner found the head of Danny Lafferty but the wing-back’s header was wide of the upright. In the 55th minute deadlock was finally broken when referee Rob Hennessey pointed to the penalty spot. Kavanagh played McGonigle into space and as the striker prepared to take control he was impeded by Byrne inside the area. Up stepped Derry playmaker, Will Patching, to stroke the spot-kick home. Rovers drew level in the 73rd minute when awarded a free-kick on the edge of the penalty area. Derry’s Ciaran Harkin upended Gary O’Neill and substitute Dylan Watts fired home from 18 yards with a powerful strike. A share of the spoils looked likely but McGonigle struck with devastating effect to earn the home side full points. DERRY CITY: Maher; Dummigan, Toal, McJannet, Lafferty; Akintunde (McEleney 54), Harkin (Boyce, 70), Patching, Thompson; Kavanagh; McGonigle. SHAMROCK ROVERS: Mannus; Hoare, Lopez, Grace, Cotter (Lyons, 65), Finn (Gannon, 88), Towell (Watts, 65), Mandroiu (Burke, 65), O’Neill, Byrne, Gaffney (Green, 82). Referee: Rob Hennessey (Limerick). Bohemians 2 Dundalk 2 Steven Bradley is a name that has been cursed many times at Dalymount Park and it was the same again last night as the Dundalk winger who shares a name with the Shamrock Rovers boss denied Bohemians a winning start to the campaign. The 19-year-old made it two in two following his opener in last weekend’s 2-2 draw with Derry City when he rose to head in Daniel Kelly’s cross on 56 minutes. Bohs – whose opening day fixture away to Sligo Rovers fell victim of Storm Eunice – had twice led with former Lilywhite Jordan Flores and Promise Omochere scoring either side of a Patrick Hoban reply but they were denied a winning start by Bradley. Keith Long’s side dominated the early exchanges with Ali Coote’s corners causing huge problems for the visiting defence with the breakthrough arriving from one on 28 minutes when Flores marked his debut with a close range header. Bohs’ lead would last less than two minutes, however, as Hoban met Dan Williams’ corner at the front post to head in the 160th goal of his career. The equaliser turned the tide with the visitors on top after that as James Talbot was called into action to make saves from Greg Sloggett, Kelly and Hoban. Bohs hit the front with a brilliant breakaway goal on 44 minutes. Kris Twardek broke down the right with his low cross flicked on by Omochere at the near post with the ball popping up into the left hand corner past Nathan Shepperd with the aid of a deflection off Mark Connolly. Bradley levelled on 56 minutes when he headed Kelly’s left wing cross in off the post. Dundalk had the better chances to win it with Talbot saving from McMillan and Bradley in the closing stages. BOHEMIANS: Talbot; Feely, Horton, Finnerty, Wilson; Devoy, Coote, Flores (Doherty 65); Twardek, Omochere, Mallon (Mullins 70). DUNDALK: Shepperd; Bone, Connolly, Boyle, Macari; Williams (Ward 53), Benson, Sloggett (Doyle 75); Bradley, Hoban (McMillan 53), Kelly (Martin 68). Referee: Paul McLaughlin (Monaghan). St Patrick’s Ath 1 Sligo Rovers 2 Strikes from Colm Horgan and Aidan Keena secured three points for Liam Buckley’s side at Richmond Park. Horgan’s volley put the visitors in front just before the break, before Keena’s deflected effort in the second half doubled their lead. Owolabi pulled a goal back late on to set up an anxious ending for Sligo, but they held on to pick up their first win of the season. Tim Clancy named an unchanged St Pat’s side, while Liam Buckley handed debuts to Nando Pijnaker, Will Fitzgerald, Karl O’Sullivan, and Keena. Mark Doyle had the hosts’ first early chance but his tame effort was easily saved by Ed McGinty. Sligo soon settled into the game and had two golden chances to take an early lead. On 12 minutes, Keena rattled the St Pat’s crossbar with a brilliant curling effort from outside the box. Minutes later, a dangerous low cross from Adam McDonnell forced Anto Breslin to clear the ball off the line after a frantic goal-line scramble. Sligo’s pressure earned a well-deserved lead five minutes before the break. McDonnell’s looping cross found Horgan at the back post who fired past Joseph Anang to put the visitors ahead. Eoin Doyle had the chance to level matters on 50 minutes, but his finish was weak. Billy King went close minutes later as St Pat’s went up a gear. Their bright spell was short-lived however. Midway through the second half Anang produced two sublime saves from Fitzgerald and Keena. Sligo doubled their lead on 78 minutes after Keena’s deflected effort looped to the net. Two minutes later, substitute Owolabi’s thunderous strike put the hosts back in the game. Joe Redmond then hit the bar in added time but Sligo held on. ST PATRICK’S ATHLETIC: Anang; Breslin, Abankwah, Redmond, Scott; Forrester, Burns, King (Murphy, 84), Lennon (Owolabi, 71); M. Doyle, E. Doyle. SLIGO ROVERS: McGinty; Horgan, Buckley, McCourt, Pijnaker; Bolger, McDonnell, Morahan (Cawley, 71), O’Sullivan; Fitzgerald, Keena (Mata, 87). Referee: Ben Connolly (Dublin) UCD 0 Finn Harps 0 Lorcan Healy produced a string of quality saves to earn newly-promoted UCD their first point of the season as Finn Harps had to settle for a share of the spoils at the UCD Bowl. Despite six new signings and it being their opening game of the season due to last week’s postponement, Harps looked a cohesive unit and should have trooped off a couple of goals to the good at the interval. Chief among manager Ollie Horgan’s newcomers were international imports Spanish defender José Carrillo, Croatian striker Filip Mihaljevic and French-born midfielder Élie N’Zeyi. UCD gave a debut to 18-year-old right back John Ryan, one of five teenagers in a side with an average age of 20. And though UCD tried to play, they struggled to create much in the final third. The far more experienced Harps’ direct approach brought the first real chance of the game on 22 minutes. Barry McNamee’s cross from the left was laid off by Mihaljevic for Yoyo Mahdy, whose drive was brilliantly turned round a post by Healy. Healy had to be there again on 36 minutes with another telling stop. Ryan and 17-year-old Eric Yoro got their wires crossed to gift McNamee a run on goal, with Healy saving with his feet. The UCD goalkeeper continued to keep his side in the game from the restart, saving superbly from Mihaljevic who met Regan Donelon’s cross. Healy was worked yet again on 55 minutes, tipping another Mihaljevic header out for a corner from Ryan Connolly’s set-piece. It was the 58th minute before UCD finally threatened. Sean Brennan found Evan Caffrey’s run into space in behind. And though the midfielder cleverly lobbed keeper Mark McGinley he saw his effort bounce over off the crossbar. UCD: Healy; Ryan, Yoro, Todd, Norris; Keaney; Kerrigan, Brennan, Caffrey, Duffy (Dignam, 58); Whelan. FINN HARPS: McGinley; Boyle, Webster, Carrillo, Donelon (Tourish, 82); Hery (Rainey, 65), Connolly, N’Zeyi, B. McNamee; Mihaljevic (McWoody, 78), Mahdy. Referee: David Dunne (Dublin).