As the country exits the emergency phase of the Covid-19 pandemic, the Government has agreed to lift the vast majority of the remaining public health restrictions. What are the new changes? From Monday, there is no longer a legal requirement for mask wearing, including in retail, personal services and schools. Specific protective measures in place in schools and early-learning and school-aged childcare facilities are also being lifted, such as the requirement for pods, social distancing and staggered breaks. What will still remain in place? While the mandatory requirement to wear face coverings has been lifted, it will continue to be advised on public transport and in healthcare settings, the Government said. In early-learning settings, school-aged childcare, primary and secondary schools, infection prevention and control measures will remain, such as ventilation, hand hygiene measures and advice to stay at home if symptomatic. The antigen testing programme will also continue in these facilities. But what if I still want to wear a mask? The changes remove the legal mandate to wear them, but it does not mean you cannot do so if you wish. Public health experts have advised the public to use their own judgment on the use of masks in retail settings, personal services, schools and busy crowds, particularly if they’re not well-ventilated facilities. Will schools operate in a manner similar to pre-pandemic times? Pretty much, with the exception of the aforementioned infection prevention measures around ventilation, hand hygiene and remaining at home if symptomatic. Guidance issued to schools from the Department of Education states “in general schools should now resume normal school routines and normal teaching and learning activities”. Staff and students are no longer required to wear a face covering but they can if they wish to do so on a personal basis. Schools should continue to make masks available on request as they are currently doing, the guidance added. Is school transport affected by these changes? The wearing of face coverings or masks on school transport will no longer be mandatory but will continue to be advised. All other measures relating to hygiene, including the provision of hand sanitiser and additional cleaning of services, and pre-assigned seating will remain in place subject to further review. What about the office? Since January 24th, employees have been permitted to undergo a phased return to the office. It is no longer required that people be spaced apart or in pods, and face masks are optional. However, employers should continue to support those workers who want to continue using face coverings, the Government’s protocol on returning to the workplace states. Is everyone happy with these changes? The teachers’ unions have expressed concern and caution over the end of the mask-wearing requirement in classrooms. The Teachers’ Union of Ireland (TUI) said the move could be “premature”, while the Association of Secondary Teachers in Ireland (ASTI) said it would “continue to urge caution”. Denis Hynes, sector organiser for hospitality at Siptu trade union, said there is an “air of caution” among hospitality workers. Many have concerns that it is too soon as cases remain high, and many workers intend to continue wearing face coverings for their own safety, he added. Do I still need to self-isolate if I’m positive? Yes. If you’re aged 13 years and older and test positive for Covid-19, you must self-isolate for seven days and wear a medical grade of FFP2 mask for 10 days, under the new rules. For children aged zero to 12 who test positive for the virus, self-isolation for seven days is also required, but a well-fitted mask for 10 days is only required for those aged nine to 12 years old. Are testing requirements changing too? From Monday, the requirement to get tested for Covid-19 lifts for most people. Only those aged 55 and older who are unboosted; those with a high-risk medical condition; those who are immunocompromised; pregnant people; and those who live in the same household or provide care or support for an immunocompromised person should undergo PCR testing. For all others, no test is required, but they should self-isolate until 48 hours after symptoms resolve. What if I’m a close contact? If you’re a healthcare worker who has been identified as a household contact, repeat antigen testing is required, unless they have recovered from Covid-19 in the past three months. All other asymptomatic close contacts are not required to test, self-isolate or restrict their movements, unless symptoms begin to appear.