The crisis in Ukraine is a “very dark moment” in European history, the Taoiseach has said, with the scale of the militarisation on the country’s border “something we would have thought was a relic of the past”. Micheál Martin was responding in the Dáil on Wednesday to Labour leader Alan Kelly, who said “a full blown war” was edging closer in Ukraine and an emergency “that we probably haven’t faced in many, many decades, is on our doorstep”. Mr Kelly also said €118 billion was moved through the Irish Financial Services Centre (IFSC) in Dublin to entities in Russia between 2005 and 2017, putting Ireland “at risk of becoming the best small country in the world to funnel corrupt, dirty, Russian oligarch money”. Mr Martin said Ireland was part of the European Union-wide sanctions regime. “We will share with the European Union any sanctions and obviously support all sanctions, including the targeting of the ability of the Russian state to access the European Union’s capital and financial markets, which will be a significant sanction in itself,” he said. The Taoiseach said he would support a cross party motion condemning Russian actions and that its aggression towards Ukraine was “unilaterally and without any justification whatsoever, threatening and undermining the integrity of an independent democratic state”. ‘Clear, strong signal’ He said Ireland had to send out a “very clear, strong signal” in terms of the State’s support for Ukraine sovereignty. “It is a very dark moment for European history...It is very serious, the sheer scale of the militarisation of the border of Ukraine, it is something that we would have thought was a relic of the past in respect of what happened in World War Two or in previous wars,” Mr Martin said. “The whole ideological approach from President Putin, the idea that the Bolsheviks got it wrong, and that Ukraine doesn’t have a right to exist, I mean that has a chilling impact on small states, like our own who enjoy 100 years of unbroken democracy.” Mr Martin said the era of states believing they can control smaller neighbours is over and that what Mr Putin has said about Ukraine ’s independence “harks back to a completely different era, in a different century and it’s very serious”. Earlier, Minister for Finance Paschal Donohoe said he expected Ireland would confirm sanctions against Russia on Wednesday. Mr Donohoe said he was “gravely concerned” at the prospect of war taking place in Europe, that an independent sovereign state was being undermined by military action. The situation across the EU would be reviewed at the meeting of finance ministers on Friday, after which there would be a response to the security, humanitarian and economic impact of a possible war, he said. The Minister told RTÉ’s Morning Ireland that he recognised the impact that a war could have on the State and Europe in terms of security and the economy. Meaning of EU membership Separately, Fianna Fáil MEP Billy Kelleher said on Wednesday that Ireland “needs to have a conversation with itself” about what EU membership means to us in the context of the crisis. He said all those in political life “needed to ask what we should do” if Russian troops cross the EU’s border with Russia, which stretches more than 3,000km from Lapland in the far North to the Black Sea in the South. Mr Kelleher said he was “not talking about sending members of the Defence Forces” to fight against Russia, but criticised that “we would be prohibited from even sending basic medical supplies and support to assist our allies’ citizens in a time of need” under his understanding of the Constitution. Unless there was a United Nations Security Council resolution, this would not change. “As Russia would be the aggressor, it’s fair to assume that such a resolution may be a long time coming,” Mr Kelleher said. Fellow member states such as Poland, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia were “our allies” and “while we don’t always agree with them on issues, especially Poland, they are part of the EU nonetheless,” he said. “This is an issue that all of us need to grapple with…Every EU member state is our ally. We cannot continue to look at our security and defence based on the realities of decisions made decades back. The world has changed.”