Facebook owner Meta is facing an imminent order from Ireland’s data regulator to suspend data transfers to the US, in a far-reaching privacy case that has already led to threats from the social media giant to pull its websites from Europe. Arthur Beesley has the details of the draft ruling by data protection commissioner Helen Dixon. One of the newest and biggest hotels in Dublin, the 421-bedroom Holiday Inn at Dublin Airport, has shut its doors to the general public after less than seven months in operation. It is understood the €50 million hotel is being lined up by the State to operate as an accommodation centre for asylum seekers. Mark Paul reports. Sinn Féin’s finance spokesman Pearse Doherty said his party would pursue “a radical departure” from the housing policy of successive Irish governments if elected that would involve a doubling of capital investment. Eoin Burke-Kennedy has the details. With interest rates beginning to rise around the world, Irish mortgage holders should act now to protect themselves against higher loan costs, writes Fiona Reddan in our personal finance feature. In Q&A, a reader wonders if they sell shares before the year end and capitalise a loss, can they use the loss to negate gains capitalised in a cryptocurrency portfolio, and then immediately after selling the shares at a loss buy them back that same day. Dominic Coyle offers some guidance. In her media and marketing column Laura Slattery ponders the puzzling backlash against the New York Times following its acquisition of Wordle. The Central Bank of Ireland has said it will press ahead with its clampdown on dual-pricing by insurers in spite of calls from the industry for it to be phased in over many months. Not before time, argues Cantillon. In Me & My Money, Pauline Prescott, founder and chief executive of Formulae Prescott, says her most extravagant purchase in the past few years was spending more than €2,000 on a Rainbow Vacuum cleaner. “I have never spent that amount of money on a vacuum cleaner before in my life, but it’s amazing.” Stay up to date with all our business news: sign up to our business news alerts and our Business Today daily email news digest.