The owners of a semi-detached house in Glenageary, Co Dublin, have a taste for bold colours: the walls of the living/diningroom are painted a dark teal, contrasting with the yellow units in the adjacent kitchen; a sittingroom has deep ochre walls; one bedroom has deep green walls, another is painted turquoise. It’s an unexpected touch in a suburban 1960s semi-detached house, extended by its owners four years after they moved in in 2004. Number 35 Thomastown Road, Glenageary, Co Dublin, a 152sq m (1,636sq ft) four-bed, is for sale through Sherry FitzGerald for €795,000. It has a Ber of D2. The open-plan kitchen/livingroom/diningroom is the heart of the home: the kitchen has a black and white tiled floor, white subway-tiled splashback and a timber-topped island unit; it opens directly into the livingroom/diningroom, floored, like all the downstairs, in solid walnut. The living/diningroom is bright: a high ceiling has a large rooflight over the dining table and double-glazed doors and nearly floor-to-ceiling windows look on to the 18m-long (58ft) back garden. There’s a utility room off the kitchen, with a small downstairs shower room off it. The cosy sittingroom at one side of the hall, to the front of the house, has a very 1960s white-tiled open fireplace. A room on the other side of the hall is set out as a double bedroom with an en suite: it could be reconfigured as a study, or perhaps a playroom, and the en suite could become a separate downstairs bathroom off the hall. Upstairs, there are four bedrooms, all with walnut laminate floors, and the family bathroom, part-tiled with green subway tiles. The main bedroom, fitted with mirrored Sliderobes, looks across to playing fields at the far side of busy Sallyglen Road. Another bedroom has room for a raised loft bed with a desk underneath, as well as a small sofa and musical equipment. Outside, a sandstone patio at the rear leads on to a lawn bordered by shrubs; farther down is a decked dining area and two garden sheds. There’s space to park in the neatly gravelled front garden, with granite paving stones forming a path to the front door. Thomastown Road runs parallel to Sallyglen Road, which links the Graduate pub roundabout to the Sallynoggin roundabout. It’s shielded from that road by high walls and shrubbery, and is accessed by car off Avondale Road. However, there’s pedestrian access at either end and it’s close to Killiney Shopping Centre at one end, and to shops next to the Sallynoggin roundabout at the other. A pedestrian crossing, nearly opposite number 35, leads across to Thomastown Park’s large playing fields. The property first went for sale last summer, but is back on the market after that sale didn’t proceed.