An Bord Pleanala has roundly rejected plans by Paddy McKillen Jnr for a “landmark” 20 storey build-to-rent tower block for Lucan in west Dublin. The appeals board has refused planning on seven grounds to Fox Connect Ltd for the build-to-rent scheme beside the Foxhunter pub at Ballydowd, Lucan. Paddy McKillen Jnr and Matthew Ryan who head up the Press Up Hospitality Group are listed as directors of Fox Connect Ltd. The appeals board has refused planning permission after widespread opposition to the scheme with 146 submissions lodged with An Bord Pleanala by locals. The refusal upholds a refusal by South Dublin County Council in December 2020. The 161 unit scheme was made up of  four blocks ranging from four to 20 storeys in height, with the highest reaching 66 metres. ‘Horrific eyesore’ Those to object to the scheme include the Hermitage Park Residents Association, the Ardeevin Residents Association and Fine Gael TD Emer Higgins. In her objection, Ms Higgins said the plan for the 20 storey block “is totally out of keeping with the character of the adjacent residential estate”. Objectors claimed that the “monolithic” 20 storey block would be a “horrific eyesore”, “a blot on the landscape” and “a visual nightmare”. In a submission to the board, the firm claimed that the proposal would offer a quality residential development for future residents in a low density location. The company also refuted claims that the scheme is overly dominant, intrusive or that it is significantly out of character with the area. As part of its appeal, Fox Connect offered to reduce the 20 storey scheme to a 12 storey proposal. Obtrusive The inspector in the case, Phillippa Joyce who recommended refusal, concluded that the 20 storey tower would be “visually incongruous” at an “outer suburban location” and that the justification for the building height is not substantiated. Endorsing Ms Joyce’s refusal recommendation, An Bord Pleanala refused planning permission after concluding that, due to the scheme’s excessive height, bulk, scale and massing, it would be visually obtrusive and would adversely impact on the visual amenity of the site. The appeals board also stated that the scheme would set an undesirable precedent for similar type developments in the area. The appeals board also pointed out that the site is zoned for retail warehousing and that “residential” is not allowed on such sites. Planning permission was also refused due to traffic concerns.