Since 1997, Sims IVF has cared for thousands of patients seeking treatment to fulfil their dream of having a baby. One of the leading fertility clinics in Ireland, with access to some of the most advanced international treatments and research, it has also helped pioneer IVF technology in Ireland. As a member of Virtus Health, the Sims IVF team has significant experience in all aspects of fertility and is the only provider with three full-service clinics and three satellite centres. New clinics The clinic is always looking for ways to expand and enhance services for patients, making significant investments including the opening of three new satellite clinics in Limerick and Dundalk in 2021, and Carlow in 2019. This investment means that patients can now attend one of the satellite clinics, in addition to the three full-service clinics in Clonskeagh, Swords and Cork, to reduce travel time. Typically, a patient would have to visit a clinic several times during their cycle, so satellite clinics provide scans and bloods and benefit patients by reducing the travel time for appointments. The provision of consultations online also reduces the amount of time that patients have to travel unnecessarily to clinics. Sims IVF has also made a significant investment in the team over recent years, which consists of experienced fertility consultants and a team of embryologists, nurses and midwives, counsellors and a patient support coordinator, in addition to a large team of support specialist functions. The team is always on hand to ensure that patients have the best experience, to support them as they navigate their fertility journey. Each person’s fertility journey is led by an experienced fertility consultant whom the patient meets with at the initial consultation. Salve app To further enhance patient communication, Sims IVF has introduced an app to facilitate direct communication between the team and patients. The Salve app provides patients with increasing levels of access to their medical and clinical treatment and facilitates open, transparent communication on a smartphone without the need to use a personal computer or laptop. The app provides an instant chat function with team members, the ability to check on test results, reminder notifications about when to take medications, and lots more to ease the patient’s fertility journey. It enhances communications with patients in addition to the regular contact and support available by phone and email. Sims IVF also engages with finance partners to provide meaningful options which are tailored to suit patients' needs. These options are synchronised with a patient’s fertility journey and are transparent in their interactions. Sims IVF continues to explore and engage with finance partners that are cognisant and empathic of the patient’s fertility journey. New services Preimplantation genetic screening (PGS), also known as PGT-A testing, will be expanded to the Cork and Swords clinics shortly. PGS is a specialised diagnostic technique that can be used to test embryos for chromosomal abnormalities. This technique is very useful for those who  experienced multiple miscarriages, where there may be an issue with the embryo. PGS allows for the selection of an embryo more likely to lead to a successful live birth. Recent sources from laboratories providing this technique to clinics suggest clinical pregnancy rates as high as 65 per cent per cycle. Find out more about fertility testing and treatment - www. sims.ie