The GAA has voted overwhelmingly for a Gaelic Players’ Association motion to prioritise integration between the association, camogie and women’s football. The debate was unanimously in support, although 10 per cent of delegates voted against. GPA co-chair Maria Kinsella proposed, saying that “equality will never be achieved as long as there are three different governing bodies”. She called on the GAA “to make integration a priority” with a plan of action and timelines. Former president Liam O’Neill spoke in support, pointing out the GAA during his term of office had been the first to suggest making progress on the issue, but although camogie had accepted the offer to discuss the issue, women’s football had declined. “The refusal of my offer to explore integration was the biggest disappointment of my presidency,” he said before declaring: “There is no more unstoppable force than an idea whose time has come.” A number of speakers spoke in favour: Ciarán McCavana, Antrim chair, who called on congress to “expose the people who don’t want equality”; former Cork chair Tracey Kennedy said she looked forward to attending “the congress of a fully integrated association”; Europe delegate Tony Bass, who echoed the call for a “roadmap that leads to real results”. On Friday the Camogie Association had announced that a similar motion would go their congress in April. It would ensure that: – organisational and governance structures reflect an integrated Gaelic games organisation – gender equity and its delivery is recognised as a core value of the Gaelic games family, promoting it across stakeholders, Government and citizens. – equitable access to full participation in Gaelic games across all units of the organisation – the promotion of our Gaelic games is strengthened on an equitable, diverse, cross-community basis. Formal progress updates will also provided to camogie’s Árd Chomhairle on a regular basis and that the Uachtarán would provide a comprehensive report of progress at congress. In his address to congress GAA president Larry McCarthy addressed the amalgamation issue by reference to the imminent update of the association’s strategic plan for the next five years and reaffirmed that the GAA “is ambitious for it to happen”. “In the next few weeks, we will publish our strategic plan for the next five years,” he said. “It has been an exhaustive process of consultation and debate and I am extremely indebted to the group of people who worked on it over the last 11 months or so. “Within the plan there are a number of priorities, one of which is six codes, one association. That is our ambition, and the work towards it is well underway. This work is building on the co-operation that takes place on a day-to-day basis through MOUs (memorandums of understanding) and projects, such as the recently published Coaching and Coach Education in Gaelic Games report. “The assistance provided to the Camogie Association in the area of commercial activity is an example. Conversations have also begun with those involved in amalgamating Irish sport organisations with similar structures to the Camogie Association, the LGFA, and the GAA in particular. “Understanding how best to amalgamate the middle tiers of each association will be critical to the process. This process will not be easy; indeed it will be quite difficult in many ways, but we are ambitious to see it happen. “Access to playing facilities in a larger organisation will be a challenge. Arguably access to facilities is currently a challenge. Given that we are in this magnificent dome, would it be appropriate that we investigate the possibility of investing in and locating a number of these structures strategically around the country.” At Saturday morning’s Central Council meeting the new games development funding model was agreed in principle, subject to further engagement with the counties. The mathematical formula was devised by a subcommittee, chaired by Shane Flanagan, the GAA’s director of coaching and games, which sets out how counties qualify for funds. It combines the number of players registered, the number of teams and clubs with project-based applications. Intended to address the disproportion in development funds awarded to Dublin in the past two decades, it is intended to establish a method of assessing budgets that will be the same for all.