HMD Global has unveiled three new Nokia branded smartphones, aimed at the more affordable end of the market. The C-Series phones join the latest updates to Nokia’s G-series devices annoucned earlier this month, as the company focuses on the entry and mid-level smartphone market. The launch of the C21, C21 Plus and C2 2nd edition comes as HMD announced it had recorded its first full year of profitability in 2021. The company has recorded growth in the past six quarters. HMD said its smartphone revenue grow 41 per cent between 2020 and 2021. The company is also betting on subscriptions to its services suite to help grow further, predicting it will have 1 million subscriptions in the first half of the year and opening a new services division to build on growth. Products The subscriptions will be split between three core products – Connect Pro, Enable Pro, and Softlock – that are currently sitting under HMD Global Services. “2021 was a transformational year, resulting in solid revenue growth across the business and today, we are celebrating a profitable new chapter for HMD Global with the release of three new affordable Nokia devices which are not only safe, reliable and durable, but ensure as many people as possible can access the latest innovative technology for less,” said Florian Seiche, chief executive, HMD Global. “I am excited to announce that our services portfolio includes a secure device financing solution for smartphones and other devices. At HMD, we are bringing together these two ingredients, a high-quality smartphone experience and a financing solution which builds upon our mission to make modern mobile technology accessible to everyone.” Battery The new C-series phones focus on durability and long battery life, up to three days depending on the model. Introduced in 2020, the C-Series of phones makes up 16 per cent of total company smartphone sales in the past five years. The new models include the C21 Plus, which has a 6.5 inch display, an IP52 rating for water and dust, and a 13 megapixel dual camera, with both panorama and portrait modes. It comes with two years of security updates, and will be available in Ireland for €109 from April. The C21 has all-day battery, an 8 megapixel camera and security features that include AI-powered face unlock, a fingerprint sensor, and two years of regular security updates. The Nokia C2 2nd edition is designed to be durable, with a tough inner metal chassis, all-day battery-life from a single charge, and a 5.7 inch display. It will go on sale for €89.