Fit out design and construction continue to evolve year on year, and despite all the challenges the sector has faced over the past 24 months, the 2021 Fit Out Awards showcased ever-growing talent and impressive fit out collaborations, designs and executions across the 27 prestigious award handed out on November 24th. With over 48 companies represented at the Awards, the sector once again showcased world-class executions demonstrating innovation, knowledge and know-how. The winners were announced during a hybrid event with a live audience in attendance at the Clayton Hotel, Dublin, who were joined online by entrants and finalists viewing the full awards which were filmed and streamed during a live, multi-camera, broadcast. Online viewers availed of a fully interactive viewing experience where they could comment and react to the results as they were revealed. The event was hosted once again by broadcaster and comedian Colm O’Regan. Now in its 10th year, the Awards were supported by leading suppliers and organisations from the sector. CEO of sponsor SDG, Louise Skeath said; “We understand how exceptionally challenging it has been this year for everyone in so many ways. It was great to see how the finalists came together to tell their positive stories and how the event adapted to the times and delivered a safe and engaging event. Congratulations to all involved and a special well done to the winners.” Another of this year’s sponsors was Etag Fixings Ireland & UK with their sales director, Shaun Bonner saying; “Huge congratulations to all the finalists of the Fit Out Awards 2021, Etag were delighted to be a sponsor once again. The Fit Out Awards are always a fantastic celebration of the industry and the standard of work is amazing. A great way to end 2021 with a celebration of the hard work that has been carried out in exceptional circumstances in the last 12 months.” Events like this are only made possible thanks to the generosity and support of sponsors. The Fit Out Awards are particularly thankful to their 2021 sponsors, which included SAS International, Ardmac, T&I Fitouts, McKeon Group, Sonica, DCON Safety Consultants, Walls to Workstation, Optima, Interiors by Sisk, TapCreative, Walls Construction, Vescom, 2tec2, SDG and Etag Fixings. One of the many trophies handed out on the day went to Johnston Shopfitters. Their managing director, Conor Cahill, said; “As we enter our 75th year in the Irish business, and having recently faced the many challenges posed by Covid-19, we are delighted to be recognised by our peers in the Fit Out industry in creating a new retail experience for our valued clients, Three Ireland.” Another winner was Millimetre Design. managing director, Ronan Holohan said; “It was an honour to accept the award for Design Practice of the Year, as well as awards within both the Hospitality, and Tourism and Leisure categories. We have participated in these awards every year since their launch in 2012 and over the years it has been an excellent platform to showcase our designs amongst industry peers. The Fit Out Awards is the pinnacle event in our diary each year.” And mac-group joined this year’s winners with their head of business development, Peter Browne commenting; “mac-group are intensely proud of the collective achievements of the dedicated teams of professionals responsible for bringing all of our award-winning projects to life. These successes are the embodiment of genuine client and contractor collaboration.” Reddy Architecture and Urbanism Group’s Lisa Smyth said: “We are delighted to win Best Fit Out Project of the Year for The Guinness Enterprise Centre. We thank our client for the opportunity to work on a project of such historical importance and significance in the ongoing regeneration of D8.” Collectively, between the live audience and the online attendees more than 700 fit out leaders, judges, sponsors and supported engaged in the 2021 awards. Darragh Feirritear, head of judging, said; “The addition of a full online broadcast of the live event has added a new dimension to the awards ceremony. Because of this, entrants to the awards can now receive comprehensive video collateral of their engagement on the night which is of huge value in their own social media communications activity.’ He added, ‘We also now provide judges feedback reports which give finalists information on how their entries faired against their competitors. This data provides insights on where improvements are needed to win more consistently at the awards.” The full list of the 2021 winners is: Excellence in Health & Safety (sponsored by DCON Safety Consultants) Winner: Ardmac Excellence in Sustainability Winner: T&I Fitouts Excellence in Collaboration (sponsored by SDG) Winner: KMCS & Focus Ireland Fit Out Project of the Year – Conservation Winner: Sligo Credit Union Fit Out Project of the Year – International Winner: Finsbury Avenue, London Fit Out Project of the Year – Healthcare Winner: The Four Ferns Fit Out Project of the Year - Tourism & Leisure Winner: The Johnstown Estate Spa Fit Out Project of the Year – Retail (sponsored by TapCreative) Winner: Three Ireland Fit Out Project of the Year - Public Sector Winner: Dublin Airport Central Fit Out Project of the Year – Hospitality Winner: Glenlo Abbey Hotel & Estate Fit Out Project of the Year – Residential Winner: 2B Wellington Road Fit Out Project of the Year - Office New Build Winner: Zurich House Fit Out Project of the Year - Small Office under €500K Winner: Regan Wall Fit Out Project of the Year - Small Office over €500K Winner: The Guinness Enterprise Centre Fit Out Project of the Year - Medium Office Winner: George's Quay Plaza Fit Out Project of the Year - Large Office (sponsored by W2W & Optima) Winner: Sonica First Landings Fit Out Project Manager of the Year Winner: Doug Ito - Sonica Young Fit Out Designer of the Year (sponsored by T&I Fitouts) Winner: Gary O'Reilly - Ethos Engineering Fit Out Designer of the Year (sponsored by McKeon Group) Winner: Emily Fedorov - Third Mind Design Fit Out Client of the Year (sponsored by Etag Fixings) Winner: Focus Ireland Fit Out Project Management Firm of the Year (sponsored by Walls Construction) Winner: Turner & Townsend Fit Out Sub-Contractor of the Year (sponsored by SDG) Winner: Hereworks Fit Out Professional Consultancy of the Year (sponsored by Ardmac) Winner: Metec Consulting Engineers Fit Out Contractor of the Year (sponsored by Etag Fixings) Winner: mac-group Fit Out Design Practice of the Year (sponsored by Interiors by Sisk) Winner: Millimetre Design Fit Out Leader 2021 (sponsored by Sonica) Winner: Graham O’ Donnell and Ann-Marie O’Neill Fit Out Project of the Year (sponsored by SAS) Winner: The Guinness Enterprise Centre The 2021 judging panel was comprised of: