Located just 350m from the seaside village of Dalkey, Anastasia Lane is a quiet, mature cul-de-sac tucked away off Sorrento Road. The owner of Number 2 purchased the property at auction in 2006 as a new home for her mother. However, her mother decided to stay put, and the owner decided not to sell: “We really loved it and decided to keep it as a rental investment until we needed to trade down ourselves. “I really saw it as being the ideal downsizer. Finnegan’s pub and the shops are just a short stroll away and they are on the flat, and when we did all the work, we kept in mind what we would need in terms of future-proofing.” In 2014, the entire house was wrapped in external insulation by Kokoon Insulation in Glenageary and the property has new windows and doors by Aru Joinery in Dún Laoghaire. Architect Mary Donohoe was tasked with creating a new principal suite for the property. To do so, Donohoe designed a new storey on one side to accommodate a spacious main bedroom with lots of storage and a fine-sized en suite. “We also thought – if the property was to be our retirement home – it might be a good idea to leave a space for a lift,” says the owner, who lives nearby. There is a space adjacent to the stairwell downstairs which has been left open and where a lift could fit if needed, and upstairs the large landing – which currently works as a study – could accommodate a lift opening if required (the shaft would be accommodated in the space outside that currently houses the bins). It is a good idea, as the principal bedroom is one of the selling points of the property, so if the house is purchased by someone who is downsizing, it could well be a deal-clincher. As well as insulation, new windows and doors, rewiring and replumbing, the property also has a new boiler. With oak flooring throughout the ground floor, and new carpets upstairs, it has the feel of a brand new house. A lovely feature is the fact that the property retains an open fireplace for cosy winter nights, and has a sunny patio to the rear. In terms of parking, traditionally tenants and former owners have parked on the wide path outside the house – as the lane itself has double yellow lines. But to be honest, it is so close to local amenities you would hardly need a car. The property, which has three bedrooms and extends to 150sq m (1,615sq ft) with a Ber of D1, is now on the market through Lisney, seeking €1.25 million.