A uniformed member of An Garda Síochána was assaulted in the early hours of Monday morning, near Blacklion, Co Cavan. The incident took place at about 2 am when the garda was on patrol in a garda car in the Loughan area. Gardaí at Blacklion were alerted to the incident by the injured garda who was disorientated and unable to explain the exact circumstances of events taking place. Gardaí based in Blacklion contacted the North Western Region Headquarters Control Room and the injured man’s location was identified through the force’s automatic vehicle and personnel location system. Gardaí and the regional armed support units then attended the scene and found their colleague still in a disorientated state, with the marked patrol car was present . According to the gardaí there was was a strong smell of a flammable accelerant in the air, which had saturated the Garda’s uniform. The Garda also had signs of physical injuries. The injured garda was taken to Sligo University Hospital where he continues to be assessed and receive treatment for non-life threatening injuries. The area where the incident took place has been sealed off and the Garda Technical Bureau are carrying out an examination. An incident room has been established under a Senior Investigating Officer (SIO) at Cavan Garda Station. The Garda member and his family are being provided with the employee assistance and support services. Speaking on Monday morning chief superintendent Alan McGovern of the Cavan Monaghan Division said the incident was a very serious attack “on an unarmed member of An Garda Síochána going about their normal duties keeping people safe. Thankfully the incident has not resulted in a fatality or other serious injury.” He said motive for the attack has yet to be determined “but it is extremely concerning that a member of An Garda Síochána appears to have been targeted and doused in some form of accelerant.” The exact intent of this attack is unknown at this time” he added. The force has appealed for any person with any information on the attack to come forward. The Garda would like to speak to any person driving on the N16, Cavan, passing Loughan House Prison, or the R206 and R207 at their junction with the N16, between 7pm Sunday 27th February 2022 and 3am Monday 28th February 2022, and in particular any person with video footage (dashcam or other format) to contact investigating Gardaí. Those who can help with the investigation are asked to to contact Cavan Garda Station at 049 4368800, the Garda Confidential Phone Number 1800 666 111 or any Garda Station.