It was a new face, Elena Rybakina, that completed the ‘Pat Cash walk’ up through the crowd and over to the players’ box on Centre Court. The Russian player turned Kazak beat Ons Jabeur in three sets 3-6, 6-2, 6-2, making history and also denying history. Rybakina is the first Kazak to win the Wimbledon women’s singles title and in that crushed Jabeur’s hopes of becoming the first Arab or African winner. “I was super nervous before the during the match. I’ve never felt something like this. I didn’t expect I was going to be in the second week in a Grand Slam here at Wimbledon,” said Rybakina. In the end Jabeur’s slicing and dicing wasn’t up to the power game of the 23-year-old after she got over a bout of first set nerves. Jabeur was the fastest into the final and earned the first break point of the match in the third game, Rybakina hitting her backhand long for 1-2. The set went with serve, Jabeur winning it 6-2 as Rybakina struggled to find her, hitting points and looking awkward at that net. Uptight, the younger player hit 17 unforced errors in the first set. But with Jabeur serving first in the second set the Kazak player went to work and forced a quick break point, Jabeur netting the ball with a forehand. The controlled power of Rybakina then slowly began to emerge and Jabeur began to feel stretched. Another service break and Rybakina found herself serving for the set. A 40-love service game and ace to finish sent the match into a third set decider and the power game coming more into play. Rybakina was beginning to find her timing and accuracy and even as Jabeur tried to change up the game with some outrageous drop shots, anything short from her was being crushed on both sides. The serve at 119mph was also a weapon that troubled Jabeur. She immediately pressed Jabeur in the first game of the third set and ironically broke serve with her weakest shot of all, a volley then served for 2-0. Another service break came midway through the set and Jabeur, despite the obvious support of the crowd, was never coming back, Rybakina closing the match in one hour 48 minutes. In triumph Rybakina didn’t know how to react and calmly went over and sat down on her chair before someone hinted at expressing some emotion. It was only then Rybakina left the chair for her triumphant walk. “I love this tournament so much,” said Jabeur. “I feel very sad but in tennis there is only one winner. I am trying to inspire more generations from my county. I hope they are listening,” said Jabeur.