Deloitte Ireland, the professional services firm, has begun a search for as much as 210,000sq ft of office space in Dublin, equating to up to 75 per cent more room than its main occupied space in the city, as it looks to future growth of its workforce and a hybrid working environment. The firm currently has multiple leases in Dublin with the largest of these at Deloitte House on Earlsfort Terrace in Dublin 2, owned by property group Iput, and the adjacent Hardwicke House building, which belongs to Hibernia Reit. Leases on both of these expire at the end of 2026. Deloitte has more than 3,000 employees in Ireland, including offices in Cork, Limerick, Galway and Belfast. It has hired Colliers to source office accommodation in central Dublin. A spokesman declined to comment on potential staff growth when asked by The Irish Times, after staff were briefed on Friday on the firm’s office plans. “While we’re in a time of economic volatility, we remain focused on the growth and development of our business,” said Harry Goddard, chief executive of Deloitte Ireland, in a statement. “This process marks a key step in our growth strategy, as we think about the future of work, and how and where our people and our clients are choosing to work. We know that hybrid working is here to stay, and we’re comfortable with that.” Still, Mr Goddard added that “feedback from our people and our clients has been that they want to use the workspace for collaboration, connection and networking and we aim to do that by providing a collaborative welcoming space that colleagues will enjoy”. Deloitte Ireland currently has about 120,000sq ft across rented office locations in Dublin. However, it is looking for new space of between 150,000sq ft and 210,000sq ft. It is understood that the firm’s current staffing levels in the city would be enough to occupy 80 per cent of 150,000sq ft of office space. The new office will need to have “strong sustainability credentials supporting the highest design standard”, according to the firm. The development comes after rival firm KPMG agreed last year to pre-let the majority of an office complex Hibernian Reit is developing on Dublin’s Harcourt Street, which will facilitate a move from the organisation’s current St Stephen’s Green office in 2026.