Lucas Herbert recalled in his pre-tournament interview about trying to get to 20-under par during his Horizon Irish Open victory last year – he made it to 19 – while simultaneously trying to chase a mark (25 under) set by Tiger Woods in winning the first of two WGC victories at Mount Juliet in 2002. Golfers are by nature superstitious or perhaps more accurately willing to use any crutch, emotional or physical, to lean on in times of adversity. The Australian explained: “Obviously I have got a lot of confidence (from the win) here (at Mount Juliet). I feel like even though I might have been playing poorly leading up, there are still some shots that I feel like, oh, just got to hit that shot and (I’m) not even thinking about how I do that. You just remember that is the shot I had to hit last year so you just visualise. If I can carry that for four days I think that would be kind of fun.” A penny for his thoughts so on Thursday morning when he stood at two over after six holes, three bogeys and a single birdie suggesting that recent travails in form terms weren’t about to be superseded by the feelgood factor of playing a venue that previously fit his eye and his game. He responded in champion fashion, playing the remainder of his round in five under, one colourful in content too with two bogeys offset by five birdies and an eagle on the par five, 10th to sign for a 69. In waking up on Friday morning his focus hadn’t shifted from that 20-under total. He managed the fast start he would have wished for with a birdie on his opening hole, one that had been a most generous benefactor the previous day, the 10th. He responded to a double bogey on the 13th with successive birdies, but it wasn’t until the front nine that he began to make significant and unerring progress up the leaderboard. His athletic swing relies on vigorous leg and foot action all the while taking divots that would thatch a small cottage. He digs for Australia as the idiom goes but it’s both controlled and effective judging on the outcome. Herbert loved playing alongside Padraig Harrington, feeding off the energy from the crowd and the warmth. The galleries have not forgotten his status. They took to him last year and were happy to celebrate his good shots and encourage him once again. He said: “There’s so much support here; I almost feel like an adopted Irishman this week. It’s been great (playing) with Paddy (Harrington) as well. The crowd out there for him has been unbelievable. “He just holed a putt on nine to be pretty safe to make the cut. The roar that came out of them was pretty incredible. It’s been nice to have both those out there this week. I mean, it feels like the majority of them are out there for Paddy but definitely saw some boys out there wearing a red shirt, so I know there’s a couple in the crowd for me. My parents are here (once again) too (so). I know there are more than two in the crowd (cheering) for me.” A birdie at the first hole, his 10th, following a glorious wedge to eight feet and he made further progress by picking up shots on the fifth and sixth; a sole regret perhaps not making further inroads at the par five, eighth. Still, he wasn’t about to quibble following a 68 and the realisation that the afternoon starters were going to have to endure heavy rainfall for a couple of hours. Herbert smiled: “I had to pretend to be upset when I saw what the weather forecast looked like in the afternoon. Just luck of the draw, some weeks you get it, some weeks you don’t. “I feel like it hasn’t been two of my greatest days, and I’m still in that top 10 at the moment (he eventually finished the day in a tie for 10th place). I’m in a good position going into the weekend,” he said four shots behind leader Jorge Campillo. Herbert continued: “The goal for the week (was) to get to 20-under and (I’m) well on the way to doing that. If everything gets firing over the weekend there is no reason why (I) can’t be there.”