Westmeath 2-14 Cavan 1-13 Westmeath made history by winning the inaugural Tailteann Cup with an impressive showing over an out of sorts Cavan at Croke Park. When Cavan moved three points clear with 12 minutes remaining, they were very much in the box seat but, down to 14 men after the sending off of Thomas Galligan, their challenge wilted and Westmeath came up with an unanswered 1-4, which decided the game. In the end, Cavan, favourites to win the competition from the outset, could have no complaints; Westmeath seemed fresher and hungrier on the day and were set up perfectly. There was little between the sides in the opening half, at the end of which Westmeath held a slender but deserved two-point lead, 1-8 to 0-9. The Lakesiders were finding space in attack much easier though; on several occasions, they breached the Breffni rearguard and they created a couple of goal chances, Lorcan Dolan taking one with a superb finish seven minutes before the break. At the other end, Cavan found themselves confronted by a wall of bodies and the resulting lateral, keep-ball approach lacked urgency and pace. Cavan started well. From the throw-in, Killian Clarke won a free, Ray Galligan took it short and Gerry Smith fired over. Paddy Lynch, Cavan’s best attacker on the day, then powered past a defender and opened his account. But four first-half points from man of the match Ronan O’Toole helped Jack Cooney’s side into that two-point advantage at the midway point. Cavan had looked flat all day but they managed to summon up what looked like the match-winning salvo when Pádraig Faulkner latched on to a break from James Smith and palmed home a goal, which was quickly followed by quality points from Gerry Smith and Lynch. However, the loss of Galligan to a straight red card was a blow and Westmeath pushed on. McCartan and O’Toole scored; Cavan struck two wides before McCartan pounced for another. And the decisive score arrived when a Martin Reilly handpass was intercepted, Westmeath poured forward and Kieran Martin waltzed through before planting a great finish to the roof of the net. Cavan had a late chance but sub Conor Madden’s effort was blocked by Kevin Maguire and Ronan Wallace bombed forward for the insurance point. WESTMEATH: Jason Daly; Jack Smith, Kevin Maguire, Jamie Gonoud; James Dolan, Ronan Wallace (0-1), Sam Duncan; Jonathan Lynam, Ray Connellan; Sam McCartan (0-3, one 45), Ronan O’Toole (0-5), David Lynch; Luke Loughlin (0-2), John Heslin (0-3, two frees), Lorcan Dolan (1-0). Subs: Ger Egan for J Lynam (58 mins), Kieran Martin (1-0) for L Dolan (60), Alex Gardiner for Loughlin (70). CAVAN: Raymond Galligan; Jason McLoughlin (0-1), Pádraig Faulkner (1-0), Killian Brady; Oisín Kiernan (0-1), Killian Clarke, Conor Brady; Thomas Galligan, James Smith (0-1); Gerard Smith (0-3), Gearóid McKiernan (0-3, one free), Conor Moynagh; Niall Carolan, Paddy Lynch (0-3), Cian Madden. Subs: Stephen Smith (0-1) for C Madden (h-t), Martin Reilly for C Brady (51 mins), Luke Fortune for C Moynagh (66), Cormac O’Reilly for K Brady (70), Conor Madden for K Clarke (70). Referee: Barry Cassidy (Derry).