A Danish man accused of shooting dead three people in a Copenhagen shopping centre on Sunday will be brought before a remand judge later on Monday. Police say the 22 year-old Danish citizen is known to them “peripherally” and is believed to have acted alone. One of the victims was a man in his 40s while the other two were “young people”, according to police. Four more people are in a critical condition. The man entered the Fields shopping centre in southern Copenhagen armed with a rifle on Saturday afternoon and the first emergency calls were made at 5.35pm. At 5.48pm police detained the gunman, who was reportedly carrying a rifle and extra ammunition. Footage from the scene of the arrest shows the suspect, wearing a white jumpsuit to preserve DNA evidence, being lead away by police officers. At a press conference on Sunday evening Copenhagen police chief Søren Thomassen said the suspect was a 22-year-old “ethnic Dane”. Initially police were unable to say if he acted alone, nor could they any motive and large a major police operation across the entire region of Zealand to ensure there were no additional gunmen. “We have to be completely certain that we have this situation under control,” he said. “This is a massive operation ... we cannot rule out terrorism.” After social media speculation about a racist motive, the head of the investigation said: “We cannot say that we have anything which supports that at this moment.” Police confirmed they were investigating videos posted online which claimed to show the suspect with weapons and pointing a gun at his head. Danish prime minister Mette Frederiksen said the attack had changed “our beautiful and usually so safe capital was changed in a split second”. “Denmark was hit by a cruel attack on Sunday night,” she added. The Danish royal family said their “thoughts and deepest sympathy are with the victims and their relatives and all those affected by the tragedy”. They cancelled a planned reception on Sunday evening to celebrate this year’s Tour de France opening route through Denmark. The shooting caused the cancellation, too, of a nearby concert by British singer Harry Styles; many concertgoers had been in the adjacent shopping centre before the gig. “We thought at first people were running because they had seen Harry Styles, then we understood that it was people in panic,” said Cassandra, a young fan, to DR television. “Then we ran for our lives.” Harry Styles said on Twitter he was “heartbroken along with the people of Copenhagen. I adore this city”. “I’m devastated for the victims, their families, and everyone hurting,” he said. “I’m sorry we couldn’t be together. Please look after each other.” Witnesses quoted by the Danish media described how the suspect had tried to trick people by saying his weapon was a fake one, to get them to approach. “He was sufficiently psychopathic to go and hunt people, but he wasn’t running,” one witness told DR state television. Other eyewitnesses told Danish media they had seen more than 100 people rush towards the mall’s exit as the first shots were fired. “We could see that many people suddenly ran towards the exit and then we heard a bang,” Thea Schmidt, who was in the mall at the time of the attack told broadcaster TV2. “Then we ran out of Field’s too.” Police had urged people in the building to wait inside for their arrival, calling on others to keep away from the area. Another eyewitness, Isabella, told DR she hid for two hours: “All of a sudden we heard gunshots, I heard 10 shots, and we ran as far as we could to take refuge in the toilet.”