Galway 0-0 Derry 0-2 (5′) Niall Loughlin steps inside Sean Kelly, injects some pace and kicks a lovely point. Cillian McDaid - who looks to be tracking Conor Glass - then kicks a second wide for Galway. Galway 0-0 Derry 0-1 (3′) Both teams’ first attack ends in a poor shot before Derry full back Brendan Rodgers kicks a brilliant point from the right wing. He looks to be picking Damien Comer. Chrissy McKaigue is on Rob Finnerty and Conor McCluskey is on Shane Walsh. Galway 0-0 Derry 0-0 (1′) As he did with all the throw-ins against Armagh, Matthew Tierney wins the throw-in but Galway’s first attack comes to nothing and Derry are straight into keep ball. Game on!! The pre-match parade is underway at Croke Park. I’m predicting a Galway win. Their last line of defence makes them and any prediction in their favour vulnerable, but I think they showed enough in the second half of normal time against Armagh to prove they have another gear in them. Galway generally rise to the big occasion and their key forwards I think will ask very different questions of Derry’s man markers and if Galway can bring the variety to their attacking play they are capable of, Derry will struggle. That said, Derry are so athletic and good in the one v one duels that a more open contest will not frighten them. And if they can build an early lead it’ll be hard to see them surrender it! We are almost underway!! Team news As expected, Emmet Bradley has been replaced by Niall Toner in the only late change to the Derry team. Galway are unchanged! Galway: Connor Gleeson; Liam Silke, Seán Kelly, Jack Glynn; Dylan McHugh, John Daly, Kieran Molloy; Paul Conroy, Cillian McDaid; Patrick Kelly, Matthew Tierney, Johnny Heaney; Robert Finnerty, Damien Comer, Shane Walsh. Derry: Odhrán Lynch; Chrissy McKaigue, Brendan Rogers, Conor McCluskey; Conor Doherty, Gareth McKinless, Padraig McGrogan; Conor Glass, Niall Toner; Paul Cassidy, Shea Downey, Ethan Doherty; Benny Heron, Shane McGuigan, Niall Loughlin. Check out Sean Moran’s preview in full here While Keith Duggan writes about Galway’s journey to today’s semi-final . . . [ Paul Conroy’s commitment to Galway shines on road from horrific injury to All-Ireland semi-final ] Galway will hope to build on last night’s victory in Dr Hyde Park where their minor footballers overcame Mayo to claim All-Ireland glory, their first at the grade since beating Derry in 2007. It’s been a good year for Galway football, with NUIG claiming Sigerson glory, Claregalway claiming the Division 1 Féile title, the minor All-Ireland victory and now their seniors are two wins away from a first senior title since 2001. Check out the match report from the minor final here Meanwhile Westmeath are the first Tailteann Cup champions after Kieran Martin’s solo goal (below) proved the difference. FT Westmeath 2-14 Cavan 1-13 Team news (as per programme) Galway: Connor Gleeson; Liam Silke, Seán Kelly, Jack Glynn; Dylan McHugh, John Daly, Kieran Molloy; Paul Conroy, Cillian McDaid; Patrick Kelly, Matthew Tierney, Johnny Heaney; Robert Finnerty, Damien Comer, Shane Walsh. Subs: James Keane, James Foley, Billy Mannion, Johnny McGrath, Niall Daley, Paul Kelly, Owen Gallagher, Finnian Ó Laoi, Eoin Finnerty, Dessie Conneely, Dylan Canney. Derry: Odhrán Lynch; Chrissy McKaigue, Brendan Rogers, Conor McCluskey; Conor Doherty, Gareth McKinless, Padraig McGrogan; Conor Glass, Emmet Bradley; Paul Cassidy, Shea Downey, Ethan Doherty; Benny Heron, Shane McGuigan, Niall Loughlin. Subs: Conlann Bradley, Paul McNeill, Padraig Cassidy, Ben McCarron, Anton Tohill, Lachlan Murray, Niall Toner, Declan Cassidy, Mark Doherty, Matthew Downey, Oisin McWilliams. Hello and welcome ... The first of this year’s, and this weekend’s All-Ireland football semi-finals sees Derry and Galway meet in Croke Park this afternoon. The meeting of the Ulster and Connacht champions throws in at 5.30pm, with the winner facing Kerry or Dublin on July 24th. Neither would’ve been among the leading contenders for Sam Maguire at the start of the year but some significant improvements and a fortunate draw in these latter stages has presented both with a huge opportunity. Galway have beaten Derry in their last two All-Ireland semi-final meetings (1998 and 2001) before going on to win their last two All-Irelands in both seasons. They also won by six points in their last championship meeting in 2015, and in 2007 Chrissy McKaigue and Paul Conroy were involved when Galway beat Derry in the minor final. Yet despite the one-way nature of previous meetings, there’s very little separating these two teams right now. Keep in touch via Twitter (@DonoghueEamon) but for now, let’s get started!