Dean Williams came back to haunt Dundalk for the second time this season as Drogheda put a major dent in their local rivals’ title credentials in the 170th Louth derby at Head in the Game Park on Friday night. While Stephen O’Donnell’s side continue to sit in second place in the league table, this was the first of two games in hand they had over league leaders Shamrock Rovers. They were unable to close the gap to seven points, however, as Williams’ goal inside the opening minute saw the former Hoops youngster sink the Lilywhites for the second time this season having also scored the only goal in the previous meeting here back in March. [ League of Ireland table, results and fixtures ] Kevin Doherty’s side were full value for their win in what was a fiery affair in which seven players were booked, with the victory seeing them open up a 13 point gap ahead of ninth placed Finn Harps. The travelling fans were stunned into silence when Drogheda took the lead after just 53 seconds. Andy Boyle failed to deal with Evan Weir’s cross from the left, presenting Williams with the chance to turn and rifle to the top right hand corner. While David McMillan and Daniel Kelly had half chances to respond for the visitors after that, it was Dayle Rooney who went closest to scoring a minute before the break with a quick free kick that almost caught out Nathan Shepperd. It would take until three minutes after the restart for Dundalk to test Colin McCabe for the first time with Leahy getting a header away that was straight at the goalkeeper. Greg Sloggett would have a header cleared off the line by Gary Deegan on the hour mark with Kelly firing straight at McCabe after that as Drogheda — who had chances of their own to add to their lead — comfortably holding out for a big win. Drogheda Utd: McCabe, Heeney, Quinn, Cowan, Weir; Rooney (Brennan 62), Deegan, Markey, Clarke; Williams, Foley (Nugent 15). Dundalk: Shepperd; Macari (O’Kane 56), Connolly, Boyle, Leahy; Sloggett (Bone 81), Doyle (Hoban 56); Adams (Ward 56), Benson, Kelly; McMillan (Bradley 77). Referee: Neil Doyle (Dublin). Gavin Molloy scored twice — his first goals for the club — as Shelbourne earned a first win in five to see off Finn Harps at Tolka Park. It rekindled a family link with the club as 20-year-old Molloy’s grandfather, Theo Dunne, captained Shelbourne to FAI Cup success in 1963 while his uncle, Tommy, also won the cup with them in the 1990s. Both sides had half chances in an open start to the game before Shelbourne punished negligent defending to take the lead from their first corner of the night on 14 minutes. Shane Farrell’s out-swinging delivery was met by poorly marked midfielder Molloy whose header bounced home. An almost copycat set-piece goal drew Harps level three minutes later. This one was a superb free kick, taken by Regan Donelon, which arced to the back post where Ethan Boyle headed the ball back across goal to the net. Home goalkeeper Brendan Clarke had to show his agility minutes later, stretching to tip over his crossbar from Harps’ skipper Barry McNamee’s dipping volley. Gavin Mulreany matched that at the other end on the half-hour, diving to his left to clasp home captain Luke Byrne’s looping header from a Griffin free kick. Eight minutes later Shelbourne regained the lead with a terrific team goal. Kameron Ledwidge, Conor Kane and Jad Hakiki combined to work the ball to Molloy who found the bottom corner from 25 yards out with a first-time drive. Jack Moylan’s clever feet might have extended that before half-time but for a fine save at his right-hand post by Mulreany. In a slow burner of a second half, Moylan worked Mulreany again before clinching the points on 75 minutes. Skipping through after a one-two with the hard-running Sean Boyd, Moylan slid the ball past the goalkeeper into the corner of his net. Shelbourne: Clarke; Griffin, Byrne, Ledwidge; Lunney (Coyle, 83), Molloy; Farrell, Hikiki (McManus, 80), Kane; Moylan, Boyd (Carr, 86). Finn Harps: Mulreany; Rainey (McGing, 82), Boyle, Slevin, Donelon; N’Zeyi (Hery, 69), Connolly; Duncan (McCaffrey, 60), McNamee, Mihaljevic (Rudden, 82); Jones. Referee: Kevin O’Sullivan (Cork).