Two Green Party TDs who lost the party whip earlier this year for voting against the Government are to support the Coalition in Tuesday’s motion of confidence in the Dáil. Neasa Hourigan and Patrick Costello said they would back the Government in the vote, proposed by Sinn Féin, further strengthening the expected margin of victory. The Dublin-based deputies, who are due to return to the Green parliamentary party in the autumn, said in a statement that they had “come to an agreement” on the matter. Ms Hourigan and Mr Costello lost the party whip earlier this year after supporting an Opposition motion regarding the relocation of the National Maternity Hospital to a site at St Vincent’s Hospital. Independent TD Seán Canney also confirmed that he would support the Government as did Independent TD Cathal Berry. [ Defence Forces funding set to increase with thousands of extra military staff ] In a statement, Mr Berry said he was “satisfied that the increased defence investment being approved by Cabinet this morning represents a significant step in the right direction for our Defence Forces and our country”. The Kildare South deputy, a former Army officer, has campaigned for increased defence spending and indicated he was prepared to support the Government in return for action on this. The Cabinet on Tuesday approved a step change in defence funding over the coming years, which is to rise from the current €1.1 billion annually to €1.5 billion by 2028 in what would be the largest single investment in the military in the history of the State. The Coalition lost its Dáil majority last week when Fine Gael TD Joe McHugh voted against legislation to bring in a grant scheme to help householders whose homes are damaged by mica due to concerns he had about the plans. Sinn Féin tabled its motion of no confidence after Mr McHugh’s departure cut the Government’s numbers to 79, one short of what is needed for a majority. However, Mr McHugh and Sligo-Leitrim TD Marc MacSharry, who has left the Fianna Fáil parliamentary party, had indicated that they would support the Coalition. Government sources are also optimistic that they will get the support of Louth TD Peter Fitzpatrick, a former Fine Gael deputy. Contacts are ongoing with Independent TD for Waterford Matt Shanahan, it is understood.