The Government has committed to new funding for Defence Forces recruitment, equipment and pay increases every year until 2028, after Ministers approved proposals from Minister for Defence Simon Coveney at Tuesday’s Cabinet meeting. Mr Coveney’s proposals, based on the report of the Commission on the Defence Forces, which was published earlier this year, will mean defence funding will rise from the current level of €1.1 billion to at least €1.5 billion by 2028. Taoiseach Micheál Martin said the increase in investment in the Defence Forces, the largest in the history of the State, showed the Government’s “strong commitment” supporting its transition into a “modern military force”. He said it would be “agile, with the appropriate capability, culture and values that reflect modern workplace and today’s Irish society”. One commitment is the immediate commencement of planning for a new radar system as well as significant investment in military hardware across the three branches of the Defence Forces — Army, Naval Service and Air Corps. In February, the Commission on the Defence Forces reported that they were not currently capable of credibly defending the country against attack, and put forward various proposals for increased funding. The commission put forward three “levels of ambition” (LOAs) for defence spending. Mr Coveney has recommended the second level of ambition but will accelerate the timelines for extra funding from 2030 to 2028. Under this level, an extra 2,000 personnel, both civil and military, will be recruited over and above the current establishment of 9,500. Work is said to have already commenced on this with the recently-announced recruitment campaign ‘Be More’. In addition, an improved regime of allowances will the payment of the military service allowances (MSA) to the rank of all three-star private/able seaman personnel. Personnel are also expected to begin receiving increments immediately. The requirement for a three-star private/able seaman to ‘mark time’ for the first three years at that rank is being removed and the same ranks will get payment of the full rate of MSA. There is also to be the provision of immediate access to the seagoing service commitment scheme to direct entry personnel in the Naval Service. Of these measures Mr Coveney said: “In line with all elements that fall within the scope of representation, implementation of such recommendations will be the subject of consultation with Defence Forces’ representative associations.” There is said to be “significant work ongoing” on a number of areas in the commission report including consideration of associate membership of Ictu for the Defence Forces’ representative associations. Sources said that while spending decisions would be made each year as part of a normal budget cycle “such is the importance of the asset, the Minister will ask Government to prioritise monies for military radar capabilities, including primary radar”. A new office for veteran’s affairs is also expected, as is a new naval diving school.