There is an unvarnished quality to Ger Brennan’s responses, reminiscent of his playing career as Dublin’s old-school stopper centre back. His responses aren’t lacquered with euphemism but neither are they intentionally provocative. They’re just his opinions. On Sunday’s Dublin-Kerry All-Ireland semi-final — the seventh Croke Park championship meeting of the game’s pre-eminent rivals in just over a decade, with Kerry still waiting for a first win since 2009 — the twice All-Ireland winner is blunt but to the point. The ongoing mystery over whether Con O’Callaghan will be fit to play is, to be fair, burning a lot of oxygen as the match approaches and the realisation sinks in that it looks like he’s the difference between blunt and relegated Dublin from the league campaign and sparkling, lethal Dublin in the Leinster championship. Speaking at a promotion for Friday’s Electric Ireland GAA minor football final between Galway and Mayo, Brennan distils, as he sees it, the essence of the event. “Probably make a bold statement here — but if Con isn’t playing and David Clifford is playing then I don’t think we will have enough to win. I think Con makes our forward line tick. He tracks so many opposition defenders, which actually allows the other forwards — in particular Cormac Costello — to flourish.” As UCD’s GAA executive, he has a good sense of what football talent is coming through and, asked if the rich crops of the past decade have begun to falter, he again doesn’t sugarcoat the answer. “It’s definitely drying up; it definitely is drying up. I think that the cohort of Jack McCaffrey, Ciarán Kilkenny, Paul Mannion, Dessie’s minor team back in 2011 and in 2012, that group of players, their natural quality — I haven’t seen it just yet in what’s coming through now. “What I have seen is wonderful structures in place with the county board, professional structures that are improving the whole time [but], in terms of the natural-born, God-given talents, I’d say that that group that has come through is outrageous and we’d be doing well to see it again in our lifetimes.” Does he believe that the winners of Dublin-Kerry this weekend are champions elect? Is that fair on Derry-Galway, the Saturday semi-final? “I know it’s terrible — yes, is the answer. I would be expecting whoever wins to push on and whoever does win between Galway and Derry, you would say they certainly have a huge, huge advantage from a motivational point of view that no one is giving them a second chance.” Mattie Kenny’s stepping down as Dublin hurling manager on the same day as this interview is a coincidence, but Brennan’s views on Eoghan O’Donnell, the Dublin hurling captain currently on secondment to the footballers, wouldn’t encourage Kenny to stay. “The more football he plays, the better he’s going to get, and he will probably push on to start, not this year but certainly going forward, if he keeps going the way he’s going. “I would say he’ll probably pack in the hurling, yeah, and concentrate on the football because the hurlers, and that’s another conversation, they’re just not good enough.” Those close to O’Donnell are sceptical about the likelihood of this career direction but for Brennan it simply makes sense. As a player he was part of a group that radically changed their course. It was Jack O’Connor’s most recent All-Ireland win with Kerry in 2009 that provided Dublin with a particularly stark ground zero. That year’s quarter-final defeat, 1-7 to 1-24, prompted manager Pat Gilroy to brand his team “startled earwigs”. Yet two years later they were reversing the result in an All-Ireland final, a first championship win over Kerry in 34 years. Loath as he is to credit his occasional indiscipline as a blessing, in relation to 2009 he’ll make an exception. “Luckily, I had been put off in the Leinster final against Kildare so I was eating a Cornetto in the Hogan Stand during the ‘startled earwigs’ match in 2009, so I missed out on the humiliation involved but obviously felt bad for the guys on the field.” He says that the punishing routines the players were put through for the following season achieved their purpose. “Pat [Gilroy] with Mickey Whelan and his team were mentally and psychologically challenging us through extreme physical ‘torture’ — the survival of the fittest, so that when faced with a daunting and apparently insurmountable challenge in a knockout game in the All-Ireland series, we could draw from the knowledge and mental reserves built up in January and February by doing something none of us had done before.” Could he see Sunday going to another penalty shoot-out like the Galway-Armagh quarter-final? “I know we’re tinkering around with the split season but I think for the All-Ireland series I’d be much more comfortable with a replay from quarter-final on.” What about a golden score — next score wins? He is initially open-minded but realisation dawns. “Oh, God. I don’t know. Imagine the pressure on the referee if there’s a foul or free. That’s a tough one but I think a replay would suit the majority.”