“You go off for an HIA and you don’t come back on, everyone presumes that’s a concussion, but it’s not. It’s just, if there is a suspected (concussion) or if there is any doubt about the player. And obviously the independent doctor felt for whatever reason, my reaction to the knock or whether it was one or two little things in the Test, but anyway, that’s history now.” After all the talk about Johnny Sexton being passed fit to play against the All Blacks despite departing the first Test following a HIA, the Ireland captain has given his two cents on the situation. He seems to suggest there was that element of doubt and hence he was withdrawn out of an abundance of caution. Whether that’s enough to quell concerns for his well-being outside of camp is another thing. In the build-up to tomorrow morning’s second Test, you can find Gerry Thornley’s preview here while Matt Williams feels that the All Blacks’ ability to do the basics so well means that Ireland need to play the best rugby of their lives to square the series. “When you win a final, everyone assumes that everything was right. When you lose one, everything gets magnified and the bones get picked out of it. But really and truly, if you’ve made it to a final — or even if you go very close in a semi-final — you’re probably going in the right direction.” With the All-Ireland hurling final approaching on Sunday week, Joe Canning reflects on his record in the sport’s biggest game. He points out that losing a final has its perks in that you get to spend the night after with family and loved ones since none of the external posse wants anything to do with the losers, but equally the analysis you do after defeat matters so much more in figuring out how far away a side is from the promised land. In Euro 2022 action, Northern Ireland were outclassed on their major tournament debut as Norway romped to a comprehensive 4-1 victory last night in Southampton. Defender Julie Nelson — Northern Ireland’s most-capped player — gave the competition’s lowest-ranked nation brief hope of an unlikely comeback by heading in a landmark goal just after the interval, but those hopes were quickly quashed by a ruthless Norway side. In club action, Dawson Devoy’s third goal in four games helped Bohemians to 3-1 victory over UCD while Sligo came from behind to beat Bala Town of Wales 2-1 in the Conference League qualifiers. Derry City saw their hopes of European progression heavily dented by a 2-0 home defeat to Riga. In her Friday column, Lisa Fallon looks at how Shamrock Rovers, in the middle of the Irish summer season, had an advantage playing against Hibernians in the Champions League given they are currently undergoing preseason and lack match sharpness. If the Conference League group stages are reached and Rovers have to play winter ball in their off-season, that advantage will be reversed. Just like that, Nick Kyrgios finds himself in the Wimbledon final. He faces assault charges back in his native Australia and his on-court behaviour has come in for plenty of criticism during this tournament, but an abdominal injury picked up by Rafael Nadal forced the Spaniard to pull out of his scheduled semi-final against the Australian, thus handing him a bye. In the women’s draw, the final match-up of Ons Jabeur vs Elena Rybakina leaves a first African contesting a Grand Slam final against the first Kazakh to do likewise.