I’m both. This year’s savings are for spending on my wedding in March 2023, while at the same time I’m saving for a deposit for a house. I do love spending, however, so much so that my partner reckons I could do it for a living. Always. I prefer to know I’ve bought something for good value with my money. I’ll always look around and search for the best value. When I was 19 I decided I wanted to buy a car, even though I hadn’t had my first driving lesson. I managed to convince my dad to come with me and we bought the car that day. It cost me €9,500 and my dad kindly gave me some money towards it. He likes to remind me of it every once in a while and jokes I still haven’t paid him back. I recently had some dental work done which has improved my confidence so much, so to me that is money well spent. A bit of both. I shopped online and local where possible. Like everyone else, not being able to leave the house meant shopping online. However, I supported local for all essential items. I wouldn’t be one to haggle. I’d rather shop around and know I was getting value for money rather than haggle on a price. I really changed my habits with money. I realised how much money I saved during the pandemic — initially from not being able to get out and about as we all navigated our way through it. I started a good monthly saving habit and considered purchases more, whether I really needed an item or if my money was better saved. Saving for my wedding and mortgage deposit has been a great habit and discipline. No — I wouldn’t know where to start. I rarely carry cash any more. The only time I would take cash out is to pop money into a card for one of the kids in the family. It was holiday clothes for my son. He’s almost three, so I went to Penneys and bought two weeks’ worth of summer clothes for him for less than €200. This was excellent value considering how quickly kids grow. I saved up for my dental work so I could pay upfront and currently I saving for my wedding which, once it’s done, will be my most extravagant purchase to date but worthwhile. Thankfully, no. I like to do a bet on occasion for the likes of Cheltenham or if there is another big race meeting on. I would never bet big enough to win big, though. The most I’ve ever put on a horse is €10. Even at that if I lost on the horse I’d be fuming, so I can’t imagine the nerves of having a higher amount at stake. We need money to pay for our home, food, clothes and so on, but money doesn’t motivate me. There have been times when I have struggled with money but was very happy with my life, and times I was earning a lot and was very unhappy. For me, happiness and quality of life are more important than money. Zero. Every cent I have is in savings for my holidays. I’ve only just about enough for a cup of tea.