It’s a family affair out at Letterfrack pier in Connemara this summer, where Eva Caulwell and her partner Tom Mullan have parked their Little Fish food truck. Several of the delicious dishes the pair are serving are adorned with pickles made by Eva’s sister Laura’s company, Lolo’s Picklery. The Little Fish logo was designed by another sister, graphic designer Sally, and the bunting around the truck was supplied by a fourth Caulwell sister, Joanna. Eva and Tom were part of the team that ran Báidín in Clifden last summer. “I left Báidín a little early last summer to return to my other job — I’m a secondary school guidance counsellor in a school in Dublin. When I left in late August Tom stayed on in the boat club in Clifden, where Báidín was based, and opened a pop-up called Gorse, until winter came. In March we started hatching plans to return to Connemara to open Little Fish food truck and now here we are.” Little Fish serves top notch fish and chips, along with buffalo tempura prawns, calamari spice bag and a hake tempura fish sandwich on a brioche bun. Opening hours are 1-8pm Thursday to Saturday, and 1-7pm Sunday and Monday. In more food truck news, Irish Times Magazine columnist Paul Flynn’s new food show on RTÉ One, Paul Flynn’s Food Truck Favourites, begins on Wednesday July 6th at 8pm. The six-part series takes the chef and restaurateur out of the kitchen and all around Ireland in search of the country’s best food truck dishes. For the opening episode, he’s in Kerry, eating lamb tacos at Chad Byrne’s Hungry Donkey, and cooking Moroccan pulled lamb and lamb tortillas from his own truck, parked at the Irish National Stud in Kildare. Denis Cotter of Paradiso restaurant in Cork will have abundant produce to pick from at the Airfield Estate in Dundrum, Dublin 14, when he cooks a pop-up dinner at the urban farm’s Overends Kitchen on Friday, July 22nd, and again on Friday, August 26th. The five-course tasting menu the chef, restaurateur and cookbook author will present and cook along with the restaurant’s head chef, Isobel Farrelly, will be created with seasonal fruit, vegetables and herbs grown on the 38-acre site. Dinner will start at 7pm with a welcome cocktail, and diners can pre-book a wine pairing featuring organic, biodynamic and natural wines. This is the first in a series of guest chef pop ups at Airfield. airfield.ie.