The executive responsible for running EasyJet’s operations has resigned following a gruelling period of disruption including thousands of flight cancellations. The carrier said on Monday that Peter Bellew had resigned as chief operating officer, but would stay with the company temporarily to “ensure a smooth transition”. His departure comes after EasyJet became one of the biggest casualties from the wave of disruption that has hit Europe’s airlines this year. The carrier has been forced to cancel thousands of flights in response to staff shortages that have disrupted the industry this summer, with some of the most damaging occurring during the UK school half-term in June. The airline was forced to cut back its summer schedule later that month as it attempted to restore order to its flight operations. The airline cut about 10,000 of the 160,000 flights scheduled to run in July, August and September, with more than 70 per cent of its customers moved to other flights within 24 hours of their original departure, the last being notified of changes on Monday. It leaves more than a quarter of prospective passengers on the affected flights facing a refund, rebooking on to another flight on a different day or having to accept a voucher for use in the future. EasyJet’s management has long insisted it does not have a staffing problem, and argues it has fallen victim to problems at airports, with shortages among air traffic controllers and ground handlers. The carrier has recruited more than 1,700 staff this year, meaning it has a similar number of employees as in 2019, despite planning to fly less. But as passenger frustration has grown, chief executive Johan Lundgren has been under increasing pressure to get a grip on the situation. British Airways, which has also suffered from heavy disruption this year, overhauled its senior management in May, including splitting the role of chief operating officer. Mr Bellew is a well-known figure in aviation. He joined EasyJet from Ryanair in 2019, prompting an unsuccessful court challenge from the Irish airline to prevent him from working for a rival. In April, the British pilots’ union Balpa told the Financial Times that Mr Bellew was behind a breakdown in relations between pilots and EasyJet’s management, particularly in its handling of staff absences. David Morgan, director of flight operations, will take over as interim chief operating officer. A well-respected figure inside the organisation, Mr Morgan was previously interim chief operating officer in 2019. With his background as a pilot, he is considered a more conciliatory figure than Mr Bellew, according to one EasyJet executive. “I would like to thank Peter for his hard work and wish him well. Everyone at EasyJet remains absolutely focused on delivering a safe and reliable operation this summer,” said Mr Lundgren. “David has significant experience and deep knowledge of the business and operation and will provide strong leadership for the airline this summer,” he added. — Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2022