Sir, – I am a full-time carer for my son. The cost of living crisis greatly affects those of us on low incomes and who have more outgoings than most families. We get €224 a week. My son requires care 24 hours a day, seven days a week, 365 days a year, as do many people, young and old, who are cared for by family carers. These are babies, children, wives, husbands, sons, daughters, sisters, brothers, mothers and fathers. Everyone needs to be cared for at some point in their lives. Some have extraordinary care needs and some of our homes are like mini-hospitals, mine included. Carers have additional outgoings due to disability services and the health service not meeting the needs of the people they care for. So on top of extra heating, extra fuel , higher electricity bills, there are extra medical expenses, bills for private specialist appointments, therapies, etc, which aren’t cheap. Carers can’t get their homes retrofitted as they don’t have the means. So we have to trudge along and try to survive and keep our homes warm, keep food in our bellies and a roof over our heads, all the while keeping our loved ones nourished, warm and well cared for. It’s a big ask. The budget needs to be brought forward; the means-test needs to be abolished for carers, and carers allowance should not be taxable. Fuel allowance should also be granted to carers. It’s otherwise impossible to keep a home heated and water warm. In addition to all of the above, trying to find a wheelchair-adapted vehicle has become next to impossible as they are like hen’s teeth. I have been waiting a year now. It’s difficult because many of the car companies have gone electric and we need diesel or petrol cars as we couldn’t possibly afford an electric vehicle. I hope that the Minister for Social Protection is reading this letter. Family carers will never down tools and walk away but it should not come to the point that they will have no other option. Who cares for the carer? – Yours, etc, AISLING McNIFFE, Ardclough, Co Kildare.