Dublin v Donegal, Páirc Seán Mac Diarmada, throw-in: Saturday 2pm Dublin and Donegal meet for the first time since the Division One league semi-final in March in the first of four All-Ireland Championship quarter-finals on Saturday. Dublin were stung by two late goals in that one as Donegal came from behind to snatch a dramatic win. They make two changes to the side that beat Mayo last time out for the game at Páirc Seán Mac Diarmada in Carrick-on-Shannon (throw-in 2pm), with Sinéad Goldrick and Kate McDaid coming in for Orlagh Nolan and Lauren Magee. There are also two changes to the Donegal side that lost out to Cork, with Susanne White and Deirdre Foley replacing Niamh Boyle and Shauna McFadden. The winners of this one will face Galway or Meath in the Croke Park semi-final on Saturday, July 16th. Cork v Mayo, Cusack Park Ennis, throw-in: Saturday 3pm Cork take on Mayo at Cusack Park in Ennis (throw-in 3pm) and the Leesiders will surely be happy that they’re flying nicely below the radar and have reached the quarter-finals with the minimum of fuss — and with less than usual talk about their prospects. Cork are still one of the leading contenders to lift the Brendan Martin Cup at the end of the month, and they’ve already banked silverware in the form of the Munster Championship. [ Ciara O’Sullivan: Cork still on course for glory, despite AFLW defections ] They beat Donegal and Waterford in the group stages and now face a Mayo side that finished second behind Dublin in their pool. There’s one change to the Mayo team that lost to Dublin for this one, with Ciara Whyte coming in for Ciara Needham. On the Cork team, there’s also one change in personnel, as Ashling Hutchings replaces Meabh Cahalane. Armagh or Kerry await the winners of this quarter-final in the last four at Croke Park, also on Saturday, July 16th. Armagh v Kerry, O’Connor Park, throw-in: Saturday 5pm That game at O’Connor Park in Tullamore (throw-in 5pm, live TG4) is a repeat of the Division Two semi-final. The Kingdom have made five changes in personnel to the team that beat Westmeath comfortably. Julie Sullivan, Aishling O’Connell, Ciara Murphy, Lorraine Scanlon and Cáit Lynch earn starts for this one, with Aoife Dillane, Ciara McCarthy, Clódagh Ní Chonchúir, Mary O’Connell and Caoimhe Evans dropping to the bench. [ Dwyer and Ní Mhuircheartaigh combine for 2-8 to power Kerry into All-Ireland quarter-finals ] Armagh have made two changes to the side that eased to victory over Monaghan, with Eve Lavery and Aoife McCoy coming in for Fionnuala McKenna and Aoife Lennon. Galway v Meath, O’Connor Park, throw-in: Saturday 7.15pm The final game of the day sees reigning champions Meath put their title on the line against Galway at O’Connor Park in Tullamore (throw-in 7.15pm, live on TG4). The Royals beat Monaghan and drew with Armagh to progress to the quarter-finals as table-toppers, as Galway finished second behind Kerry to advance. Galway came with a late surge to put some gloss on the final scoreline against Kerry, but will admit they were second best on the day. The holders have made two changes to the team that drew with Armagh in their last outing, as captain Shauna Ennis and Kelsey Nesbitt are back in the team, with Aine Sheridan and Meadhbh Byrne dropping out. For Galway, there’s one change to the team that accounted for Westmeath, as Hannah Noone comes in for her sister, Lynsey.