Mattie Kenny has stepped down as Dublin hurling manager. The Galway native, who also took Dalkey club Cuala to back-to-back All-Ireland titles, informed the county board that after four years he would not be seeking another term in charge. Appointed in late 2018, his four years with Dublin included two defeats of Galway in 2019 and last year but he was unable to take the team farther than the All-Ireland quarter-finals in 2021. A former coach with Anthony Cunningham’s Galway management, Kenny was disappointed this year to miss out narrowly on qualification from the Leinster round robin after defeat in Galway, coupled with Wexford’s defeat of Kilkenny lost Dublin third place on scoring difference. In a statement on the Dublin website, he said that managing the team had been “a great privilege and honour”. “We worked tirelessly in the effort to bring success to the county and our passionate band of Dublin supporters. I would like to express my sincerest gratitude and thank the Dublin county board, the management committee and great staff and stewards in Parnell Park for their unwavering support for me and my management team and players during our tenure. “I want to acknowledge and thank every member of my management team and back room team for the massive contribution and commitment you have given to the preparation of the team during this period. “I would like to thank our loyal supporters and “The Friends of Dublin Hurling” for your massive support for the team, both in Parnell Park and at our away games all around the country. “Finally, a special thank you to a fantastic group of players. The respect and togetherness within our group made it a joy to work with you every day during my term as manager, and while we didn’t achieve the targets we set out for ourselves, I fully believe the success you deserve will arrive in the coming seasons.” County chair Mick Seavers paid tribute to the departing manager. “Mattie has made an enormous contribution to Dublin GAA winning two All-Ireland senior club hurling titles with Cuala. In his time in charge of the senior hurling team we had some memorable wins and a first Leinster final appearance in seven years in 2021. “I regret his departure but appreciate the huge sacrifices he has made over the last four years for Dublin GAA. “The committee will commence the process of considering suitable candidates to replace Mattie and his management team shortly.” Among those potentially in the frame is one of Kenny’s successors at Cuala, former Kilkenny All-Ireland winner and Laois manager Eddie Brennan.