Carlos Sainz won an incident-packed and dramatic British Grand Prix for Ferrari after China’s Guanyu Zhou escaped from an enormous accident. Sergio Pérez was in second for Red Bull while Lewis Hamilton equalled his best finish of the season with a magnificent third place after an absolutely thrilling fight at Silverstone. Ferrari’s Charles Leclerc was in fourth with Alpine’s Fernando Alonso in fifth. Championship leader Max Verstappen could manage only seventh after he took damage. It was Sainz’s first F1 win on the occasion of his 150th race and could not have been a more gripping affair. The Spaniard had to fight hard in an unpredictable race and take every chance to seal the place to become only the second Spaniard to win in F1, alongside Alonso. Hamilton, too, showed resilience and pace in battling to a brilliant podium. Verstappen took the lead with a fast start and Hamilton also made a superb getaway, leaping from fifth to third, but behind them there was a major incident into turn one. The race was almost immediately stopped after a multi-car shunt involved Zhou’s Alfa Romeo suffering a high-speed impact with the barriers, in which his car was flipped and came to a halt between the armco barrier and the catch fencing and it took time to extract him. He was safely removed and taken to the medical centre for examination. He was conscious and was released having been declared fit. George Russell was clipped by Pierre Gasly in the incident also involving Yuki Tsunoda, Esteban Ocon and Alex Albon and the Mercedes driver then collided with Zhou, turning his car over, causing it to hurtle at high speed across the gravel trap before impacting the barriers and sailing over them into the fence. Russell’s car took sufficient damage to end his race. Albon was taken to hospital for a check-up but was pronounced unhurt. It was designated a racing incident, the drivers just running out of space at pace into turn one. However, the scale and speed of the incident was horrific and Zhou was remarkably lucky to have escaped, another case where the halo cockpit protection device almost certainly proved vital. He was upside down for a considerable distance and the tyre barriers barely slowed the car but instead launched it into the catch fencing at high speed. That Zhou was relatively unharmed was a testament to the safety standards of the modern cars. The accident occurred only hours after Roy Nissany and Dennis Hauger had a high-speed crash in an F2 race in which Hauger landed on Nissany’s car, the halo once more crucial in preventing a serious injury. Almost an hour later the race was restarted but because not all cars had not passed the second safety car line when the race was stopped it resumed in grid order, returning Sainz to the front and Hamilton to fifth. The restart was frenetic, Sainz far bolder and aggressive squeezing out a charging Verstappen and the front six going wheel to wheel across the opening lap and Pérez had to pit early for a new nose after taking damage in a clash with Leclerc. Verstappen stayed right with Sainz who was pressured into a huge unforced error on the exit of Chapel, oversteering and going wide, allowing the Dutchman through into the lead on lap 10. However, Verstappen then slowed and believed he had a puncture as Sainz re-passed again through Stowe and the Dutchman had to pit for new rubber. Sainz led from Leclerc and Hamilton but Verstappen reported he had a problem and the team said he had lost rear bodywork and grip rather than a puncture. He dropped to sixth as Leclerc harried Sainz. Sainz pitted on lap 21 while Leclerc and Hamilton stayed out, the British driver closing to under two seconds. Leclerc pitted on lap 25 putting Sainz in front again but with Leclerc clearly quicker, Ferrari swapped their positions on lap 31. Hamilton had pushed hard and pitted on lap 34, the stop was slow – four seconds – and he emerged in third behind Sainz and six seconds off Leclerc. The safety car was then called when Ocon stopped on track and Sainz and Hamilton both pitted to take the soft tyre for a late charge but Leclerc stayed out to maintain track position. It left him on used hard tyres for the closing laps, setting up a grandstand finish. The race restarted with 10 laps to go and Leclerc and Sainz went wheel to wheel with the Spaniard taking the lead into Brooklands, while Hamilton was passed by Pérez as the pair vied furiously. Pérez fought with Leclerc and Hamilton brilliantly ducked up the inside of the pair of them on the final corner but could not hold the place as they came back at him at Village and he dropped once more to fourth. It was gripping stuff. Pérez then made a pass on Leclerc and Hamilton looked to go next, the pair endured a thrilling toe-to-toe through corner after corner until Hamilton finally made it stick through Stowe. It was the race of the year without doubt and Sainz held his nerve to seal a win that will linger long in the memory. Lando Norris was sixth for McLaren and Mick Schumacher and Kevin Magnussen eighth and 10th for Haas. Sebastian Vettel was ninth for Aston Martin. – Guardian