Limerick have won their third All-Ireland on the trot. They pulled away in the first half, withstood a Kilkenny comeback in the second before the bench pulled away for a relatively convincing win in the end. Catch up on all the action as it happened including live reaction, analysis and in-game clips from Croke Park. I’ll bid you all adieu with the full-time highlights. Thanks for tuning in, scroll down for further reaction and analysis from Croke Park. We’ll have reports and written analysis, reaction and ratings coming up shortly on our site. Then there was this injury-time score from Gearóid Hegarty. Limerick were already four up at this point but such an emphatic score so late in the game really killed off any Kilkenny optimism. Then there was this effort from Martin Keoghan and I’m struggling to decide which Kilkenny goal was better. After struggling in the first half to get anything out of the Limerick full-back line in the air, TJ Reid plucks the ball out of the sky beautifully. He loses his hurl in the process but manages to palm the ball away to Mullen. His pass in to Keoghan on a diagonal run is a bullet but the soft touch with the hurl to take it in is fantastic. From there, it’s a brilliant finish on the spin to beat Quaid at the near post. What a second half that was. The players felt the heat much more than in the first, fatigue levels grew as accuracy dropped and scores fell by the wayside but it was nonetheless enthralling. Let’s look at those two Kilkenny goals that at one stage levelled proceedings. First off it was Billy Ryan in the 38th minute. Walter Walsh’s impact after coming on at half-time was immense. He comes away with the puck-out, carving a run from wide towards the Limerick goal. After beating his man and cutting inside, a deft touch from Martin Keoghan found Ryan with a yard of space. He had three green shirts swarming on him but managed to pull a strike into the bottom corner. Nice touch from Declan Hannon as he brings Cian Lynch up with him to lift the Larry McCarthy cup. Full-time: Kilkenny 2-26 Limerick 1-31 Limerick have joined the select club of three-in-a-row champions! They’ve also won four out of the last five All-Ireland’s. Kilkenny threw everything at Limerick with two second half goals as Walter Walsh’s introduction at the break changed the game. That figured without the Limerick bench though who quelled the comeback and pulled away at the end to secure a historic victory. LIMERICK ARE THE ALL-IRELAND CHAMPIONS 70 mins: Sideline ball for Limerick and you have to think that’s that. Kilkenny 2-26 Limerick 1-31 70 mins: Throw ball up in Kilkenny’s half. Twenty seconds to go... Kilkenny 2-26 Limerick 1-31 70 mins: Well Kilkenny have more there, Alan Murphy firing from range to bring the deficit back to a goal. One minute remaining. They have another one! David Blanchfield finishes the ball there and fires it over from range. Kilkenny 2-26 Limerick 1-31 70 mins: Tommy Walsh has just notched his first point of the championship from distance. Great score from the corner-back but Kilkenny need more. Kilkenny 2-24 Limerick 1-31 70 mins: That’s a big free-out for Limerick with their full-back line under pressure. O’Donoghue then wins another long ball in as Hegarty works the space for the long-range shot and it’s over! That has to be that for Limerick! Kilkenny 2-23 Limerick 1-31 69 mins: Good work from Lawlor who loses his hurl but still stops Gillane from getting the ball in a dangerous spot. Eoin Murphy is then fouled as Kilkenny get the free-out. Four added minutes! Kilkenny 2-23 Limerick 1-30 68 mins: Hayes is pulled on as he runs through a gap and wins the free. The Limerick bench is having a huge impact here. Gillane knocks over the easy free. Kilkenny 2-23 Limerick 1-30 67 mins: Mullen drops the ball in on goal but Nash comes away with it. Boylan then picks it up with acres of space in front of him but lets fly from distance, arrowing over a crucial score that brings Limerick’s lead back out to three points. Peter Casey has a chance to stretch it to four but it’s wide. Mullen follows suit with a wide of his own for Kilkenny. Kilkenny 2-23 Limerick 1-29 65 mins: Kilkenny are working like dogs in midfield as Hayes coughs the ball up. TJ Reid takes the ball in the area but his ball back infield is intercepted. Great defence which quickly turns to attack as Cathal O’Neill lets fly. Hawk-Eye again! The verdict is... Tá! Over the bar it is and once again, that was comfortably inside the post. Not sure what the umpire is looking at there. Kilkenny 2-23 Limerick 1-28 63 mins: There’s Hogan! His first touch of the ball is to knock the ball down and his second is to launch it between the uprights. Great score. Limerick respond in kind though through Kyle Hayes with his fourth point of the afternoon. He’s been immense today. Kilkenny 2-23 Limerick 1-27 63 mins: TJ Reid could have pulled the trigger under pressure but opts instead to pull it back inside to his brother. Richie has a much better look at goal but puts it wide. Kilkenny 2-22 Limerick 1-26 61 mins: Reidy has his first point since coming off the bench. Or does he? The referee wants a look at Hawk-Eye. It’s just outside the post, could not have been any closer. There’s the value of the technology which remember wasn’t working at the football last week! Kilkenny 2-22 Limerick 1-26 60 mins: Hayes once again is the distributor for the strike from Morrissey, but this time he’s put it wide. Conor Boylan enters in place of Flanagan in the Limerick forward line. He’ll have to wait for the ball though as Mullen strikes from the sideline with his weight going the other way and sends it over the bar. Kilkenny 2-22 Limerick 1-26 59 mins: Deegan could well have been charging there as he once again runs into a wall of green. This time he gets the free and TJ Reid fires over. Richie Hogan is on for Kilkenny. Kilkenny 2-21 Limerick 1-26 58 mins: Just like that Tom Morrissey responds. He takes the pass from Hayes athletically over his head, spins quickly to the right and fires over the bar on a tight angle. Kilkenny 2-20 Limerick 1-26 57 mins: TJ Reid takes the free from his own ‘45 and he’s got it. That’s Kilkenny’s first score in nearly nine minutes. Kilkenny 2-20 Limerick 1-25 56 mins: Deegan puts the head down into a sea of green jerseys but can’t go anywhere and loses the ball. Butler takes his eye off the ball but recovers just enough to win the free-out. Kilkenny 2-19 Limerick 1-25 54 mins: Nash and Finn disrupt a series of long balls in as the Limerick defence looks to reassert their superiority in the air. There’s a scrap for the ball up the field and a throw-ball is the call but Kilkenny come away with it. A free-out follows. Fatigue definitely a factor here in the heat as the pace of this one has slowed right down. Kilkenny 2-19 Limerick 1-25 53 mins: Hegarty finds Tom Morrissey in acres of space up the park. He could run with it towards goal but he decides to take his point and bring the lead to three once again. Kilkenny 2-19 Limerick 1-25 52 mins: Limerick are definitely rattled. Quaid is under no pressure at all as Limerick throw the ball around the back but he takes his eye off it to nearly let it go for a ‘65. He’s done well in the end to keep it it. David Reidy is now on for Limerick. Kilkenny 2-19 Limerick 1-24 51 mins: Gillane wins the race to the ball on the edge of the D but his pass back is a poor one. Deegan lets fly from range as Kilkenny regather but it’s wide. Kilkenny 2-19 Limerick 1-24 50 mins: Limerick get a free just inside their own 45 and Byrnes smashes it over from range. He took his time over it too, clever stuff just to take the sting out of Kilkenny’s run. Kilkenny 2-19 Limerick 1-24 49 mins: Morrissey responds for Limerick. Peter Casey is on for Mulcahy and after the effect of the Kilkenny bench, you felt Limerick had to turn to theirs. Kilkenny 2-19 Limerick 1-23 47 mins: What a goal! TJ Reid starts it off with a brilliant grab in the air. He loses his hurl but palms it away to Mullen who rifles it first time to Keoghan. It’s a brute of a pass to control from so close to him but he does before burying it in the corner. Kilkenny follow up with a long-range score from John Donnelly with his first touch and just like that the scores are level! Kilkenny 2-19 Limerick 1-22 46 mins: Seven wides each now after that effort from Gillane. Hayes and Mullen get well acquainted after the whistle but nothing serious. Sideline ball for Kilkenny and TJ Reid puts it close to the Limerick goal but this time the full-back line is able to deal with it. Kilkenny 1-18 Limerick 1-22 44 mins: That’s a simple free for Gillane after a Kilkenny pull-back. Kilkenny continue to improve in the air down the other end as Keoghan gets on the end but his ball across the field looking for Walter Walsh is snuffed out. Kilkenny 1-18 Limerick 1-22 43 mins: That’s why Walter Walsh is on the park. First of all his high take leads to a chance for namesake Pádraig, but he puts it wide. Moments later Walter Walsh decides to do it himself, claiming in the air, riding the challenge and sticking the ball over the bar. Kilkenny 1-18 Limerick 1-21 41 mins: Mulcahy is the only Limerick forward to not score today and that won’t change now as his effort is blocked. Limerick to get the ‘65 out of it and Diarmuid Byrnes makes no mistake. Kilkenny 1-17 Limerick 1-21 40 mins: Limerick won’t panic. Hegarty is miles from goal but calmly slots it over the bar just to calm any nerves following that Kilkenny goal. Mullen responds with a point after TJ Reid’s high take. Better from Kilkenny in the air. Kilkenny 1-17 Limerick 1-20 38 mins: Gillane finds himself one-on-one with Lawlor deep in the Kilkenny half but opts for the point rather than the goal. Down the other end KILKENNY HAVE A GOAL! Walsh has a quick impact off the bench, driving it across the face of goal. It’s left to Billy Ryan who doesn’t have long to set himself but finds the bottom corner. Brilliant work from Keoghan to draw in the defence by letting it go through to Ryan. Kilkenny 1-16 Limerick 1-19 37 mins: No change to Limerick’s aerial dominance in the Kilkenny half. Hayes plucks it out of the sky, lands and pulls the trigger. First score of the half. Kilkenny 0-16 Limerick 1-18 36 mins: Given Kilkenny’s struggles in the air, it’s no surprise to see Walter Walsh sprung at the break. Cian Kenny is the man who makes way. Back underway at Croke Park with the Cats on the attack to start. He works hard to get the ball on the floor but after opening up space for the shot he’s put it wide. Kilkenny 0-16 Limerick 1-17 If the players are feeling the heat, it hasn’t had an effect on the pace of play in the first half. In 35 minutes, we’ve had 36 points and 34 scores. This Hegarty goal was the moment of the half. First of all it’s clever from Morrissey to leave the ball in the air and draw one of the Kilkenny markers away from goal. Then Flanagan pulls out a deft touch with his foot, switching codes momentarily to knock the ball into the path of Hegarty. From there, he muscles his way past the two defenders before launching it into the top corner. Brilliant stuff. Limerick are certainly good value for their four-point lead at the break. Gearóid Hegarty has been sublime, a single wide aside. His ability to work off defenders just enough to open up space has been very impressive, as has his ability to shoot off balance. The Limerick forwards in general have had plenty of success getting to the balls launched into them, notching score after score simply by out-working to the markers either in the air or on the ground once the ball hits the deck. Kilkenny on the other hand have struggled big time to make any inroads through Limerick’s full-back line. There has been little to no success in opening up shooting chances high up the pitch, the scores they are getting coming largely from frees the forwards have fought for. Half-time: Kilkenny 0-16 Limerick 1-17 35 mins: Ryan has nowhere to go with plenty of green shirts swarming but a pull on his arm has been spotted. TJ Reid brings the half to an end with yet another successful free. Kilkenny 0-16 Limerick 1-17 35 mins: Flanagan makes up for his wide a few moments ago with a score from the same position. Another time a Limerick man has been able to take his time with the effort. I wonder if the heat is beginning to have an effect on the defence. Kilkenny 0-15 Limerick 1-17 35 mins: Two added minutes as Limerick’s midfield links nicely to open up the space for Dan Morrissey. He ends the run of wides to bring the lead out to five. Walsh responds quickly for Kilkenny off the puck-out. Kilkenny 0-15 Limerick 1-16 34 mins: Hegarty was very nonchalant there, perhaps too much so. He shrugged off his marker well to take his time with the shot but he’s put it wide to the left. Another wide comes from Flanagan. TJ Reid follows suit down the other end as both sides’ accuracy starts to let them down. Kilkenny 0-14 Limerick 1-15 32 mins: Walsh drifts off the Limerick defence and no one goes with him. With acres of space, that’s an easy score despite the distance. Keoghan gets inside the cover once the ball goes back in but once again a free is awarded. TJ Reid converts from out on the left. Kilkenny 0-14 Limerick 1-15 31 mins: TJ Reid works a goal chance through three defenders but Nash does enough to put him off. Illegally so as a free is called and Reid taps it over from straight in front. Down the other end, Hayes takes a beautiful ball in the air, works infield and then launches it just inside the left upright. Kilkenny 0-12 Limerick 1-15 30 mins: Hannon and Limerick are oozing confidence. He comes away with the ball inside his own half, runs into the open field in front of him and lets fly as he crosses into Kilkenny territory. Too good. Kilkenny 0-11 Limerick 1-14 29 mins: Neither side can miss at the moment. Kilkenny work the ball from the right sideline infield and there’s Deegan to launch it over on the angle. Mikey Carey sticks to Hegarty well down the other end to force a rare wide from the Limerick man. Kilkenny 0-11 Limerick 1-13 28 mins: Hayes is stopped in his tracks deep in the Limerick half, but illegally so. Gillane slots over the free. Kilkenny 0-10 Limerick 1-13 27 mins: That’s a nasty pull from Mulcahy on Mikey Butler. No card but TJ Reid has a free opportunity from the sideline. Over the bar it goes, he’s four from four so far with the dead ball. Kilkenny 0-10 Limerick 1-12 26 mins: Hegarty has another fantastic score to bring his tally to 1-3. Hawk-Eye was called for there but I’ve no idea why, that was a shocking miss from the umpires. Kilkenny 0-09 Limerick 1-12 25 mins: Ruthless defence from Limerick. Keoghan eventually wins the ball after a series of brutal challenges close to the Limerick goal but even though he’s in a dangerous spot, he gets shunted over the line for a wide. Kilkenny 0-09 Limerick 1-11 24 mins: After a lengthy pause for Casey to receive treatment, Byrnes launches the free from long range over the bar. Kilkenny 0-09 Limerick 1-11 22 mins: This time Mike Casey is the one with the fantastic defensive work for Limerick. He rises high in the air to claim before winning the free off Walsh. Kilkenny 0-09 Limerick 1-10 21 mins: What a score that is from Mullen. Off balance on the touchline, he has the radar working as he slots that one. Kilkenny try to follow up quickly with another score but Nash is too good at the back as he gathers and clears. Kilkenny 0-09 Limerick 1-10 20 mins: TJ Reid needs support while under pressure and he gets it from Deegan. He’s completely unmarked and sticks it over the bar. Kilkenny continue to struggle to contain the Limerick forwards, though, as yet again Gillane is the quickest to the ball on the deck and he cashes in. Flanagan quickly follows up for Limerick, five of their six forwards have scored in the first 20 minutes. Kilkenny 0-08 Limerick 1-10 19 mins: Deegan’s effort comes up short and is claimed by Quaid. Hegarty’s strike does not come short as the 2020 hurler of the year slices that one between the uprights from out wide. He’s heating up for Limerick. Kilkenny 0-07 Limerick 1-08 18 mins: Two quick points for Kilkenny as the Reid brothers go back to back. The gap is now down to three. Kilkenny 0-07 Limerick 1-07 16 mins: O’Donoghue takes a series of savage hits before laying off to Hegarty. It’s a simple score for him and he has O’Donoghue to thank for that. Kilkenny 0-05 Limerick 1-07 15 mins: Brilliant to Morrissey, proving accurate from out wide just as Kilkenny looked to be going on a run. Kilkenny 0-05 Limerick 1-06 14 mins: TJ Reid has the vision to spot Deegan in space and he duly notches a much-needed score for Kilkenny. Limerick respond with their second wide of the day, Mulcahy the guilty party. Up the other end, Keoghan gets his first score of the game after winning the race to the ball close to the Limerick goal. Kilkenny 0-05 Limerick 1-05 12 mins: Brilliant from Deegan in the air to shut down that Limerick attack but Kilkenny quickly cough up the ball. Hayes has too much space to line up his effort and it’s straight over the bar. He needs a new helmet though as play is halted for a few seconds. Once Murphy hits his puck-out, Byrnes gathers with his right takes a few steps before launching it between the posts. Brilliant score. Kilkenny 0-03 Limerick 1-05 11 mins: Hannon launches a shot very quickly after gathering but it’s short and Murphy gathers well under pressure. Kilkenny then work a free in a decent position once the ball is sent up the park. No mistake from TJ Reid after he won the free himself with his strength in the air. Kilkenny 0-03 Limerick 1-03 9 mins: Flanagan works so hard to hold onto possession under serious pressure from his marker Walsh. Two Kilkenny players come in to support in defence but they end up tripping Flanagan up. Gillane will take the free and he’s added to Limerick’s lead from a wide position. Kilkenny 0-02 Limerick 1-03 8 mins: That’s better from Kilkenny. Carey takes the high ball brilliantly before passing off to Cody who launches it over the bar from out wide. A bit of momentum now after their slow start. Good work at the back two prevents Hayes from having a pull when he was in a good position for Limerick. Kilkenny 0-02 Limerick 1-02 7 mins: Kilkenny are finally on the board thanks to a straightforward TJ Reid free. Kilkenny 0-01 Limerick 1-02 6 mins: Kilkenny’s wait for a score goes on. Murphy launches a free wide. From the following puck-out, Gillane wins a high ball into the area but loses his hurl! He was in on goal but with nothing in his hand he opts to kick the ball over the bar instead of going for goal. Kilkenny 0-00 Limerick 1-02 5 mins: What a goal! Hegarty is first to a loose ball deep in the Kilkenny half, he brushes past Richie Reid before launching the ball into the top corner past Murphy. It’s all Limerick so far! Kilkenny 0-00 Limerick 1-01 GOAL GEARÓID HEGARTY 3 mins: Loose enough from Flanagan as he beats Walsh to the ball but can’t keep it in play. The officials say it took a touch off the Kilkenny man, though, allowing Limerick possession to open up the chance for Mulcahy. He puts it wide Kilkenny 0-00 Limerick 0-01 2 mins: Diarmuid Byrnes loses it on the deck but his wrist work to flick it back off the deck is magnificent. He wins the free in midfield which he will take himself. It’s hard and flat and over the bar! Limerick strike first. Kilkenny 0-00 Limerick 0-01 1 min: The 2022 All-Ireland final is underway as Limerick launch the ball forward, only for the Limerick full-back line to deal with it. Walsh strikes the first effort of the day for Kilkenny in towards Hill-16 but he’s put it wide. Kilkenny 0-00 Limerick 0-00 Right then, less than five minutes until throw-in. Kilkenny are unbeaten in championship action since Kilkenny beat them in the 2019 semi-final. Will history repeat itself or will Limerick complete the three-in-a-row? And just before we concentrate on the game exclusively, a nice touch from the GAA as they have asked Ukrainian children to bring the Liam McCarthy onto the pitch before the game. [ All-Ireland hurling final: Ukrainian children to bring Liam MacCarthy Cup on to field ] Let’s get to the teams then. With no Lynch, Limerick have named an unchanged XV from their semi-final, as have Kilkenny. Joe Canning and Nicky English have run their over both sides for us. Kilkenny: Eoin Murphy (Glenmore); Mikey Butler (O’Loughlin Gaels), Huw Lawlor (O’Loughlin Gaels), Tommy Walsh (Tullaroan); Michael Carey (Young Irelands), Richie Reid (c, Ballyhale Shamrocks), Paddy Deegan (O’Loughlin Gaels); Cian Kenny (James Stephens), Conor Browne (James Stephens); TJ Reid (Ballyhale Shamrocks), Pádraig Walsh (Tullaroan), Billy Ryan (Graigue-Ballycallan); Adrian Mullen (Ballyhale Shamrocks), Martin Keoghan (Tullaroan), Eoin Cody (Ballyhale Shamrocks). [ Hurling columnist Joe Canning runs the rule over Brian Cody’s men ] Limerick: Nickie Quaid (Effin); Seán Finn (Bruff), Mike Casey (Na Piarsaigh), Barry Nash (South Liberties); Diarmaid Byrnes (Patrickswell), Declan Hannon (c, Adare), Dan Morrissey (Ahane); William O’Donoghue (Na Piarsaigh), Darragh O’Donovan (Doon); Gearóid Hegarty (St Patrick’s), Kyle Hayes (Kildimo-Pallaskenry), Tom Morrissey (Ahane); Aaron Gillane (Patrickswell), Seamus Flanagan (Feohanagh-Castlemahon), Graeme Mulcahy (Kilmallock). [ Hurling analyst Nicky English runs the rule over John Kiely’s men ] Of course, the Kilkenny defence will be more than happy they don’t have to deal with Lynch. One man who has carved out a crucial role as the specialist man-marker in their full-back line is Mikey Butler. It’s been a remarkable rise for Butler who has gone from the Cats waterboy as a teenager to a starter in the All-Ireland final. Malachy Clerking has documented his path. [ From water-boy to corner-boy, the rise of Mikey Butler ] One man who won’t be carrying a hurl at any stage today is Cian Lynch. Everyone thought he would have recovered from a hamstring injury in time for today but it turns out he’s picked up an ankle issue during his recovery. He has been pictured arriving at Croke Park on crutches and in a protective boot. Seán Moran has more. [ Cian Lynch fails in bid to recover for All-Ireland final ] The players have arrived and have been out on the Croke Park surface, without their hurleys of course. For those that don’t know, the GAA still has a bizarre rule that players can’t initially go onto the park with their hurleys in order to preserve the grass. Hurlers without their hurls, seems a bit mad... Next up we have Nicky English. Like most people, he fancies Limerick but admits Kilkenny have more of a chance now than he would have thought earlier in the campaign. That begs the question then, have the Cats timed their run perfectly? [ Nicky English: Limerick deserved favourites and can stay ahead of improving Kilkenny challenge ] Before we get into team news, let’s have a look at the preview pieces from our writers. On Friday, Joe Canning spoke about his memories of the sport’s showpiece event. It’s impossible to treat it like any other game, especially when as many as 70 friends and family once asked him for tickets! [ Joe Canning: You can’t pretend the All-Ireland final is just any other game ]