There are two stages in the ongoing energy crisis. Here in Ireland we are still firmly in the initial one, where the big issue is rapidly rising prices and the ability of vulnerable people and families to afford the basic heat and light they need. That’s a scary enough prospect. Every other news bulletin seems to carry details of yet another provider hiking up the cost of electricity and gas by high double-digit amounts. All providers have now returned to the well multiple times. From the start of next month customers at Electric Ireland, the biggest player in the domestic market, will pay almost 50 per cent more for electricity than at the same time last year, and over 75 per cent more for gas. On an average bill that’s over €1,000 from after tax income. But Germany is moving decisively to the second stage – where, regardless of cost, the fear is that they will not be able to get sufficient energy supplies at all. The country has already began rationing hot water, dimming its street lights and shutting down swimming pools as both domestic and business users feel the pinch as prices surged following the decision of Russia to cut back supplies. Economy minister Robert Habeck, who has already ramped up the country’s emergency gas plan, is trying to lead by example by taking shorter showers. Residential landlords, housing associations and local authorities are heeding the call, according to the Financial Times, limiting the supply of hot water to certain times of the day or turning down the thermostat on gas heating systems. Helmut Dedy, the head of the German Association of Towns and Cities, has urged local authorities to turn off traffic lights at night, shut off hot water in council buildings, museums and sports centres, adjust air conditioners and stop illuminating historic buildings. The aim: to reduce consumption and conserve supplies for what already looks like a very difficult winter ahead. Irish consumers may take comfort in an assurance on Friday by the UK National Grid that they will be treated the same as those in Britain in the event of any gas shortages, which could see the UK shut the taps on interconnectors to the mainland EU. But that’s only as good as the security of their supplies. A chill wind this winter seems inevitable.