Sir, – When the late and unlamented Charles Haughey was going through one of his periodic political downfalls, Conor Cruise O’Brien observed that he would believe it when he had seen him buried at a crossroads with a stake through his heart, and even then he would carry garlic and a crucifix. The tone of the “resignation” speech suggests that similar caution should apply to Mr Johnson. – Yours, etc, MILES PARKER, Royston, UK. Sir, – Boris Johnson’s resignation, albeit fuelled by a series of avoidable personal scandals, was eventually forced by Conservative Party politicians losing confidence in an unorthodox prime minister’s ability to win future elections and consequently their own seats. Notwithstanding the chaos and unpredictability of his premiership, Mr Johnson delivered the biggest landslide victory for his party since Margaret Thatcher via mass defection by working-class voters, broke the Brexit paralysis, achieved considerable success on Covid vaccine rollouts and, despite the bombast, crafted an economically functioning political “no man’s land” in Northern Ireland. Despite the widespread exuberance at home and across the Irish Sea, Conservative politicians may soon regret throwing their captain overboard before watching their ship subsequently sink. Judging by his potential successors, the Irish public may not be far behind; better the devil you know than the one you don’t. – Yours, etc, STEPHEN SHINE, Dallas, Texas. Sir, – It seems that Boris Johnson did not acquire herd immunity when he succumbed to Covid. – Yours, etc, PAT DUGGAN, Tramore, Co Waterford. Sir, – Boris Johnson described the political system as Darwinian. I presume he meant that the fittest people would rise to the top jobs in politics. If Boris was the fittest Tory available for the job of prime minister, just how much worse and how less suited to the job will Mr Johnson’s successor be? I suspect that the change of prime minister will lead to a continued absence of integrity and truthfulness in the British government. – Yours, etc, FINBAR KEARNS, Piercestown, Co Wexford. Sir, – Following the performances of David Cameron, Theresa May and, most recently, Boris Johnson, it will be fascinating to see who wins the race to be the next person to fire Michael Gove. – Yours, etc, BRIAN O’BRIEN, Kinsale, Co Cork. Sir, – It is no great surprise that the resignation of Boris Johnson was greeted with a mixture of delight and mockery from a series of readers on your letters page (July 8th). It seems likely that there is little love in Ireland for the UK prime minister. But perhaps I might observe that he still has admirers across the water. However much his critics guffaw, some of us still believe he got the big decisions right (support for the Ukraine, the vaccine programme, Brexit). His faults are real but less important. Did I care that he had a birthday party in Downing Street? No. Did I care that he stayed loyal to some politicians that it would have been politically expedient to abandon? No, I liked him more for it. Did I care that he tried to dodge uncomfortable questions? A little, but few politicians can avoid doing this. What I did dislike was the pack of wolves which descended upon him in the last week, many of whom owed their seats in parliament to his campaigning. Mr Johnson got it right when he spoke about the “herd” moving against him. He gave a dignified speech outside No 10, polite and genial to the last: a giant brought down by Lilliputians. – Yours, etc, DAVID HARRIS, Poole, Dorset, UK. Sir, – The resignation speech (if that’s what it was) of the UK’s prime minister Boris Johnson was in many ways, representative of his premiership – a rambling, arrogant, misguided, illogical shambles. Compare this to the sincere words of departure as enunciated by his predecessor. Normally, departures of this nature are a time when colleagues and even erstwhile political combatants express words of praise or sadness, thanks or sorrow – little of this has been evident in the case of a man who has an “eccentric relationship with the truth”. Boris Johnson has been no friend to Ireland or Europe generally, happy as he was to break international law and exclude himself from any form of behaviour that could be described as decent or honourable. I hope that his departure will allow for a more constructive and mature relationship with our close and important neighbour and rebuild that which was casually cast aside by someone who put himself above all. – Yours, etc, NEVILLE SCARGILL, Bray, Co Wicklow. Sir, – I, like many young Irish, started my career in England, in the 1960s. I have been very grateful for that opportunity, and enjoyed life there, and I made many friends and acquaintances. This was the era of the Harold Wilson governments. Since then I have taken a large interest in UK politics. I am saddened that the politics has deteriorated so much in the last decade with a succession of Tory leaders. I also feel sad that just over half the English electorate were duped about Brexit, and for personal gain. I watched all the vox-pops on TV during the campaign. I think that whether it was the retired plumber, or the shop worker, they did not understand what they were voting for. Hopefully things will improve in the future. – Yours, etc, JOHN E HEGARTY, Cork. Sir, – Wouldn’t listen, didn’t hear the herd, them’s the facts. – Yours, etc, MICHAEL GANNON, Kilkenny.