Dublin 8 €1.295m 126 South Circular Road, Dublin 8 Description: Restored and extended three bedroom house Agent: Sherry FitzGerald Dating from 1820, the terrace of four houses at 126-132 South Circular Road in Dublin 8 is described in the National Inventory of Architectural Heritage as “a fine terrace (that) adheres to a building tradition which is typical of well-designed suburban housing in Dublin city in the first part of the nineteenth century” which “contrasts with the predominantly late Victorian terraces in the area”. Situated just after Leonard’s Corner, the property was purchased by its current owner in 2016 for €615,000. according to the Property Price Register: “I had looked at 70 to 80 houses over the space of two years and wanted something old that was not superimposed into a central location,” says the owner, who spent the guts of three years restoring the house back from commercial use to its original function as a two-bay two-storey over-basement house. As it is a protected structure all the headaches have been borne by the current owner who engaged conservation architectural firm Robin Mandal to completely restore the house. The application to return the house to residential use was straightforward, while “all the pain was in the restoration”. Now completed, the resulting home, with 216sq m (2,325sq ft), is a lovely mix of period features married with an almost industrial vibe in some of the rooms. At hall level two reception rooms, divided by an aperture where doors would have been, have exposed brick chimney breasts, which add much interest against an all-white palette. One of these rooms is now used as a home office, with an antique desk taking centre stage, while the room to the rear – overlooking the garden – is used as a drawing room. Downstairs is the show stopper. Here what were three dark separate rooms covered with plasterboard have been opened up into a super kitchen and living room. To the rear an extension houses L-shaped glazing with sliding doors – and overhead roof lights bring much light into the room and address its northerly aspect. The owner engaged a local welder to build a simple clean-lined staircase on site. It is really lovely and “though it cost 20 times less than a commercial one we think it is 20 times nicer”, says the owner. Exposed overhead beams are now cleaned and treated in the kitchen area and house smart light fittings. The fact that the new floor is at a lower level than was initially constructed gives the effect of higher ceilings: “It’s hard to describe the impact of the room here, as it is lower than the road front, and because it is bordered by the garden and lots of trees, it feels like you are miles away from where you actually are.” Bedrooms also allow the period details to shine through, and the use of sash windows – which were a requirement as the property is a protected structure – really give it lots of character. The fine property, in turnkey condition, is Ber exempt, and is now on the market through Sherry FitzGerald seeking €1.295 million.