More money, more problems is an adage that applies to Shamrock Rovers right now. Stephen Bradley expects a punishing injury report, followed by a logistical nightmare to reach Razgrad in northeastern Bulgaria before next week’s Champions League second round qualifier against Ludogorets. “There are a few knocks to be honest after some really rash tackles in the second half,” said Bradley after Rovers 3-0 aggregate win over Maltese champions Hibernians guaranteed the club €1.4 million in prize money. “There are a few in there with swollen knees and ankles so hopefully they settle and it is not too bad.” The game went so far beyond the control of Lithuanian referee Manfredas Lukjančukas that Bradley kept Graham Burke on the bench after the attacking midfielder was booked while warming up in the first half. [ Shamrock Rovers set up European tie with Bulgarian champions Ludogorets ] “I would have brought Graham on, I wanted him to get minutes, but the way the game had gone, in terms of them being so cynical, I just felt all it took was a mistimed tackle or someone lying on the ground and he gets booked. That definitely played a part in the decision.” Due to the global airport crisis, caused by staff shortages, Rovers chartered flight to Malta this week had to go from Shannon via Paris but Bradley sees no clear route into Bulgaria. “It looks like it is going to be really tricky, it doesn’t look like there are any charters available,” he said. “Hopefully in the next day or so it will clear up.” The upside to winning this Champions League qualifier is the guarantee of three more European ties and a real chance of reaching the Europa Conference League group stages, which comes with a €3.3 million windfall that would create further separation from every other club in the League of Ireland. “This is what we tried to work towards for the last few years,” said Bradley. “We have given ourselves a really good chance now. Winning the first round opens up so many routes. “We know [what’s next] is a step up in class but we will be ready. “This is where you want to be, it is where you want to test yourself as a player, a coach, a manager; this is why we work so hard, to put ourselves in this position. It is fantastic for any Irish team to do well in Europe. Hopefully it is only the start and we kick on and play European football for the rest of the season.” Or well into the off season.