Sir, – Ireland has one of the highest levels of obesity in Europe, with 60 per cent of adults and over one in five children and young people living with overweight and obesity. There is evidence that obesity is now among the major threats to population health worldwide. Obesity is linked to higher rates of chronic conditions (including diabetes, hypertension, asthma, heart disease, and cancer) than smoking, drinking or poverty. We also know, through the life-course model, that obesity early in life is a significant risk factor for obesity later in life. Simply put, obese children very often become obese adults. However, if we can reduce the incidence of obesity in childhood, we can sever the link with obesity in adulthood, resulting in a healthier population. A key method in achieving this aim is through targeting junk food marketing to minors. There are also very significant lifelong financial consequences for both the obese person and the State. The total lifetime costs of overweight and obesity in Irish children was estimated at over ¤20 billion before the pandemic, or ¤150,000 per obese child. Child obesity worsened during pandemic, steepening an already very worrying trend. In the context of the ongoing cost of living crisis with so many pressures on individuals, families and communities; this is unsustainable and must be minimised. The Government must take responsibility and stem this worsening trend with every tool it has. We welcome the actions outlined in the 2020 Public Health (Obesity) Act but we can and must do more. In order to help sever the link between childhood and adult obesity and for the health of future generations, we therefore add our voice to the wider coalition who called for a ban on junk food online marketing to under-18s and TV advertisements before 9pm. Before long, junk food marketing will hopefully join smoking marketing as a thing of the past. – Yours, etc, Dr DOUGLAS HAMILTON, Chair, Irish Society of Specialists in Public Health Medicine, Banagher, Co Offaly.