The shooting of former Japanese prime minister Shinzo Abe has sparked condemnation from political leaders across the world. Mr Abe (67), Japan’s longest-serving prime minister who stood down in 2020, died after being shot twice in Nara, a city close to Kyoto. Taoiseach Micheál Martin said he is “deeply shocked” at the gun attack on former prime minister Shinzo Abe. He has extended his condolences to his family and to the people of Japan. The Minister for Foreign Affairs Simon Coveney also paid tribute to Mr Abe who has died following a shooting on the campaign trail. “He was very decent, a gentleman” Mr Coveney told RTÉ Radio’s Today with Claire Byrne show. The two met during an Irish trade mission to Japan. News of the shooting and death of Mr Abe was very shocking, particularly at an election event and in a country such as Japan. The former Prime Minister had been a central figure in Japanese politics who changed the economy. He had also been a big figure in world politics, said Mr Coveney. The Irish embassy in Japan said it echoed the shock of Mr Abe’s shooting. “Our Embassy & whole team ... deeply saddened by the violent passing of Abe Shinzo. Sincere condolences to his family & people of Japan,” it tweeted. The former Northern Ireland First Minister Arlene Foster recalled how she had welcomed Mr Abe to the G8 summit in Enniskillen in 2013. “How awful that he has lost his life in such a violent way,” she said. [ Shinzo Abe shooting: Former Japanese prime minister has died ] Jens Stoltenberg, secretary general of Nato, the western military alliance, said he was “deeply saddened by the heinous killing of Shinzo Abe, a defender of democracy and my friend and colleague over many years”. “My deepest condolences to his family, PM [Fumio] Kishida and the people of Nato’s partner Japan at this difficult time,” he said. Japan’s fellow Quad members, Australia, India and the US, were among the first to respond after the shooting. India’s prime minister Narendra Modi called for a day of national mourning in his country, saying he was “shocked and saddened beyond words at the tragic demise of one of my dearest friends, Shinzo Abe”. Before Mr Abe’s death was reported, Antony Blinken, US secretary of state, said the shooting was a “very, very sad moment”. Mr Abe was instrumental in the formation of the Quad group, which is widely acknowledged as a partnership designed to counter China’s assertiveness in the region. China’s foreign ministry also expressed “shock” at Mr Abe’s shooting and extended condolences to his family. Kevin Rudd, the former Australian prime minister, said the attack “provides a sober reminder to all our democracies of how precious our freedoms are”. “An attack on any democratically elected political leader is an attack on supporters of democracy everywhere,” said Mr Rudd, who is now president of the US-based Asia Society think tank. [ Shinzo Abe: A resilient, driven leader who became a controversial figure ] Former US president Donald Trump, with whom Mr Abe forged close ties, said via social media that the shooting was “a tremendous blow to the wonderful people of Japan”. Mr Abe’s public support for Taiwan had strengthened since he left office in the face of rising Chinese aggression against the democratic nation. Tsai Ing-wen, Taiwan president, condemned the “violent and illegal acts”, while Wang Ting-yu, a member of Taiwan’s parliament from the ruling Democratic Progressive Party, said that “PM Abe is a good friend of Taiwan”. Charles Michel, European Council president, said he was “shocked and saddened by cowardly attack on Shinzo Abe while performing his professional duties”. “A true friend, fierce defender of multilateral order & democratic values,” Michel said. “[The] EU stands with people of Japan and [prime minister Fumio] Kishida in these difficult times.” The former Japanese prime minister has long been a target of Chinese nationalists. One popular Weibo comment under the news of the incident read: “Don’t forget that he visited the Yasukuni Shrine,” referring to the controversial memorial that honours Japan’s war dead, including some convicted war criminals. French president Emmanuel Macron said he was “profoundly shocked” by the “hateful” attack on Mr Abe, whom he described as a “great prime minister”. Spanish prime minister Pedro Sánchez condemned “this cowardly attack”, adding that “Spain stands in solidarity with the Japanese people in these difficult times. Anthony Albanese, Australia’s prime minister, said “our thoughts are with his family and the people of Japan at this time”. — Copyright The Financial Times Limited 2022