An Bord Pleanála has given the green light to Trinity College Dublin’s (TCD) plans for a 358-bed student residential scheme at Trinity Hall on Dartry Road in Dublin 6. The project involves the demolition of Cunningham House and the provision of connected residential blocks, with one reaching to eight storeys in height. The appeals board granted planning permission despite Dublin 6 residents claiming that drunken, disorderly and antisocial behaviour by student residents would be an issue. An objection lodged on behalf of the management company of the Temple Square South residential complex — Elderberry Ltd — by Hughes Planning and Development Consultants said that its clients were living with antisocial behaviour by students. The submission claimed this would substantially worsen with 358 additional students at Trinity Hall. However, addressing the claims of antisocial behaviour, board inspector Rónán O’Connor  said he was satisfied that with student accommodation management in place, the potential for noise and antisocial behaviour would be minimised. Mr O’Connor said TCD already has a combination of directly employed TCD staff and contracted security on duty in the existing residences on a 24/7 basis and that the reception is always staffed. Mr O’Connor said “potential antisocial behaviour by future occupants of the development, outside of the boundaries of the site would be a matter for the authorities if such issues were to arise”. Mr O’Connor also said a number of submissions said the proposal would “result in a reduction in property values”. He said this contention was “not supported by any evidence”. Recommending a grant of permission in his 175-page report, Mr O’Connor said the student accommodation scheme was desirable due to its proximity to third-level institutions and public transport services. Mr O’Connor said he was satisfied the development would not have any significant adverse impacts on the amenities of the surrounding area. “The future occupiers of the scheme will also benefit from a high standard of internal amenity,” he said. TCD already provides 995 bed spaces at Trinity Hall and planning consultants for TCD, Declan Brassil & Company, said the proposed development would “assist in addressing the current undersupply of student accommodation in Dublin city and reduce pressure on the private rental market”. A spokesman for TCD said: “The university is delighted with this positive outcome, but at present is unable to comment further on the detailed time frames for the next stages of the project.”