PM Group, the Irish-based international engineering and construction management company, grew its operating profit by 26 per cent last year to €43.9 million, its latest set of accounts show. The group announced its financial results for the year ended December 31st, 2021, on Friday. Net assets increased 31 per cent to €145 million. Overall revenue, including pass through revenue – where the group carries procurement and contract costs of behalf of clients – was €475 million, up 19 per cent. This performance was delivered following a strong increase in underlying fee revenue of 21 per cent. The group is employee-owned with more than 1,200 people holding shares in the business, up 20 per cent on the previous year. PM Group’s workforce grew by 17 per cent to 3,500 people working across Europe, North America and Asia in 2021. The group’s international presence grew in 2021 with new office openings in the United States and Germany. PM Group is currently working on a range of projects across multiple countries providing design, construction and project delivery solutions to clients in the pharmaceutical, food, mission critical, med-tech and advanced manufacturing technology sectors. The company is creating 500 new jobs this year across a range of disciplines including engineering, construction, commissioning, data analytics, finance and IT. Of these, 300 positions will be based in Ireland. Recruitment for the new positions is already underway. PM Group chief executive Dave Murphy said: “As we begin to navigate the post-pandemic world, it is really encouraging that we are in a position of strength to continue to serve our international clients and grow our business internationally. “The year saw increased investment by our clients and 54 per cent of our work is now international. “As a company, we have further increased our US presence through the opening of our Philadelphia office, to support the growth and opportunities we have seen there. “We also opened a new office in Frankfurt, Germany, complementing our offices in Belgium and Switzerland. “The first quarter of 2022 has seen the strong momentum we had at the end of 2021 sustained. Notwithstanding economic and geo-political issues, our multinational clients continue to invest major projects across key markets.” The group continues to expand across all its markets with major projects undertaken for Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, J&J, Meta, MSD, Pfizer and Sanofi. The group said the outlook for 2022 is positive with activity levels and backlog remaining strong. Group performance in the first quarter to March has maintained the strong trading momentum from 2021, with revenue and earnings up year-on-year. This year will see PM Group employees around the world return to offices “in large numbers” as the company rolls out its hybrid working model. The development of digitally enabled tools will support employees to work flexibly. Sustainability will remain a “key priority” for PM Group with plans to agree longer term carbon reduction targets set to take place this year. The group will also continue to develop its metrics for reporting.