Denmark captain Pernille Harder’s second half header earned them a 1-0 win over Finland in the Women’s European Championship on Tuesday to keep their knockout hopes alive. After a lacklustre first half, Denmark got the breakthrough in the 72nd minute when their all-time top-scorer Harder nodded home from a rebound after Karen Holmgaard's header hit the crossbar. It was attacking midfielder Harder's 69th goal for Denmark, who were runners-up in the 2017 edition of the tournament. Harder went down in the 85th minute after a clash of heads with Finland's Emma Koivisto and went off after receiving treatment. Denmark goalkeeper Lene Christensen pulled off a brilliant one-handed save towards the end of the game to block a shot from Jenny-Julia Danielsson from outside the box, as Finland suffered successive defeats. Denmark remain third in Group B on three points after two matches, below Germany and Spain who played in Tuesday’s other clash in the competition. Eight-times women’s European champions Germany cruised clinically into  quarter-finals as Group B winners with a game to spare after beating Spain 2-0 at Brentford’s Community Stadium. Spain, who had hoped for an historic first win over Germany, enjoyed far more of the ball but lacked the final touch against opponents who pressed hard and were quick to seize their chances. Germany were gifted a goal in the third minute after a blunder by Spain goalkeeper Sandra Panos, whose attempted clearance went straight to Klara Buehl for her to slot home. Forward Lucia Garcia then had a chance to equalise in the 10th but, after going around keeper Merle Frohms, her shot went into the side netting. Alexandra Popp, making her first start after striker Lea Schuller tested positive for Covid-19 the day before, doubled the tally for Germany in the 37th with a flicked header off a corner. Frohms made a great fingertip save in the 71st from a Mariona Caldentay volley, her only big moment of the night, and Tabea Wassmuth had the ball in the back of the net in the 81st but was clearly offside. Both sides had scored four in their opening group games and drew 1-1 on their last meeting in February in the Arnold Clark Cup at Middlesbrough’s Riverside stadium. The defeat in front of a 16,000-strong crowd left Spain level on three points with Denmark. Germany have yet to concede a goal and are on maximum points. (c) Copyright Thomson Reuters 2022