The tragedy of the Irish Civil War has been recalled in Michael Collins’s hometown of Clonakilty in west Cork in a mural inspired by Austin Clarke’s poem about the conflict, which was unveiled today by the Mayor of County Cork, Cllr Danny Collins. The mural by Cork artist Garreth Joyce is the second such mural to be unveiled in Clonakilty and joins an earlier work by artists ADW and Darren Warrant, the Truce Mural, depicting the ending of the War of Independence, which was unveiled at the Kent Street Parklet in July 2021. Cllr Collins said the unveiling of the latest mural, just weeks before the Michael Collins Centenary Commemoration Festival in Clonakilty, was a reminder of the tragedy of the Civil War and the loss of hundreds of lives including that of Collins who was killed at Béal na Bláth in August 1922. He said that the mural by Garreth Joyce draws on the imagery of Austin Clarke’s poem The Lost Heifer, which Clarke himself explained had its origins in the Civil War when he believed the ideals of the patriots of the War of Independence were lost in the bitterness of the conflict between brothers. “The bright and colourful mural looks beautiful and blends with the surrounding foliage in Croppy Park. But it has a deeper meaning that illustrates the damage of the Civil War,” said Cllr Collins who earlier revealed that Collins had long been a political hero for him. “It tells the story of the heifer, an old symbol of Ireland and Irish culture, lost in the dark mists of the countryside before coming to the fore in more optimistic times in the post-War of Independence period. The heifer then disappears into the dark rain of the oncoming Civil War again. “This mural tells the story, and illustrates the tragedy, of the Civil War. Garreth has found a brilliant way of presenting this complex period of history through poetry and symbolism, creating a beautiful piece of artwork which offers something for all ages to explore and learn from.” A native of Cork, Garreth Joyce is a honours graduate of Limerick School of Art and Design who began painting murals and street art in 2016. Among the works he was commissioned to paint was a mural depicting Cork’s martyred Lord Mayor Terence MacSwiney on Liberty Street in Cork. Commenting on his latest work, Joyce said: “I thoroughly enjoyed the challenge of creating a Civil War-themed mural in a public park setting, the heavy themes of Ireland’s struggle for freedom subtlety resting in a colourful, bright and playful piece of artwork.” Cllr Collins, who on his election as county mayor predicted the highlight of his year would be his attendance at the Centenary Commemoration of Michael Collins’s death at Béal na Bláth, praised all those behind the commemoration festival in Clonakilty next month. He said the festival, which runs from August 14th to August 22nd, would feature a broad programme of events, including a parade to Clonakilty’s Emmet Square, a symposium of history talks, an outdoor cinema event, theatre, special exhibitions, history walks and several commemorations. Cork County Council chief executive Tim Lucey said that one of the first events of the festival took place last month when an actor re-enacted a speech Collins gave outside O’Donovan’s Hotel in Clonakilty in June 1922 as part of his election campaign, and it augured well for the festival. “The re-enactment on Pearse Street gave both locals and visitors to Clonakilty a taste of what is to come in August. A large screen showed silent newsreel footage of his speech and actor John O’Leary arrived into town in a 100-year-old Model-T Ford to give a recital that truly captured the audience. “Cork County Council is immensely proud to support the Michael Collins Centenary Commemoration Festival. There will be events suitable for all throughout the summer as we mark the centenary of such an important moment in the history of our State.” He explained the festival is a collaboration between local groups such as Michael Collins House Museum, Michael Collins Centre, the Michael Collins Commemoration Committee, the Sams Cross Commemoration Committee, Dúchas Clonakilty and Cumann Seanchais Cloich na Coillte and more. Events are being funded by individual groups and by Cork County Council’s commemoration fund. A commemorative booklet and programme would be available in the coming weeks with further information available online and on the relevant social media sites, Mr Lucey said.