Sir, – The Minister of State for Special Education Josepha Madigan decided to name and “shame” four schools that she believes are not engaging with the Department of Education when it comes to special education provision. The principals of the schools in question claim they have not been adequately resourced, despite engaging with the department, to provide a suitable special needs environment (“Schools singled out by Madigan over special needs reject claims”, Education, June 27th). No matter which side you think is right or wrong, engaging in Boris Johnson-style rhetoric to grab a few headlines distracts from the complexity of the situation and makes it appear that the issue can be resolved simply, and is surely the worst form of political opportunism. Does the Minister really think that this approach will, as Boris Johnson might say, get special education done? If the Minister and the Government she represents are really interested in ensuring that there is a suitable school place for every special needs child in the country, then the megaphone diplomacy approach needs to be urgently ditched. – Yours, etc, SEAN KEAVNEY, Castleknock, Dublin 15. Sir, – Minister of State for Special Education Josepha Madigan’s decision (News, June 27th) to “name and shame” four national schools in north and west Dublin, for allegedly failing to engage with her department on providing special classes for autistic children, shows extraordinary cheek. Her decision to single out Scoil Bhríde national school, Blanchardstown, based on inaccurate information, is simply baffling and ignores the work already done by the school to provide for children with additional educational needs. The school has a strong record as a highly inclusive school community with a diverse student population; the school already has one special class and has been in regular communication with the National Council for Special Education (NCSE) to raise concerns about staffing and resources. There is a national crisis in provision for autistic children because Ms Madigan’s department and the NCSE have failed to engage in forward planning or evidence-based research to identify the shortfall in school places for children with additional needs. This crisis has come to a head recently in Dublin 15 and it was only when a dedicated group of parents campaigned publicly to highlight a shortfall of at least 47 secondary school places for autistic children up to 2025 in the Dublin 15 area alone that the Minister took any action. Principals are right to challenge Ms Madigan’s posturing and failure to acknowledge a systemic failure by her department and other State agencies. Setting up a special class requires more than an empty room with a table and a few chairs – schools need specialised staffing, resources and consistent support services, all of which the department has repeatedly failed to provide for both special classes and special schools serving children with additional needs. Ms Madigan is engaged in a selective blame game to divert attention from her own failures. – Yours, etc, Cllr JOHN WALSH, (Labour), Castleknock, Dublin 15.