New Zealand 12 Ireland 23 This game may have been discoloured by an extraordinary rash of one red card and three yellow cards in a wacky opening half which lasted nearly an hour, yet there’s every reason for believing that Ireland would have levelled the series anyway to set up a series decider in Wellington next Saturday. Ireland again started much the better when both sides were at their full complement for the first 17 minutes before the All Blacks lost their discipline and incurred two yellows either side of a red card in a wild 18-minute period. Even adding in the ten minutes when both sides were subsequently reduced to 14 men after James Ryan’s yellow card, overall Ireland outscored the All Blacks by 17-7. By contrast, amid shades of Twickenham after Charlie Ewels’ third-minute red card, Ireland lost a little of their attacking shape and composure when enjoying a one- or two-man advantage. In addition to their lack of discipline on the pitch, the All Blacks management appeared to struggle with the rules. Their second yellow card having been completed they had the temerity to bring back three players and taking off one, so restoring themselves to 15 players before Jaco Peyper and his officials rightly decreed that the red card incurred by replacement prop Angus Ta’avao for his reckless, upright, head-to-head hit on Garry Ringrose meant they had to resume with 14 players. What’s more, after Ireland again opted for a scrum, the All Blacks had to bring on another prop Aidan Ross, and opted to replace Ardie Savea, meaning it was Savea who had to sit out the remainder of the match. In truth, winger Leicester Fainga’anuku had been fortunate not be red-carded for leaping to block Mack Hansen’s chip and following through to catch the winger with a shoulder to the head. What’s more, after opting for uncontested scrums on foot of replacing Savea with Ross, it appeared the All Blacks should have been reduced to 12 men, as happened to Italy against Ireland in the Six Nations at the Aviva Stadium. When James Lowe knocked on from the ensuing scrum as Johnny Sexton pulled the ball out the back with Hugo Keenan and Hansen on his outside, the All Blacks roused themselves into life. Ryan’s yellow and Beauden Barrett’s slightly fortunate try with the last play of the half appeared to give them a lifeline too. But the way Ireland impressively regrouped at half-time and renewed their supremacy when it was 14-a-side for the first ten minutes of the second period effectively won the match. “They were calm at half-time,” said Andy Farrell. “They knew exactly what to do. They knew not to get carried away. They knew how to control the game. They knew that at the forefront of that, that the defence was going to be absolutely crucial. We never once differed in our mentality which was strong.” [ Keith Earls to captain Ireland against Maori All Blacks ] [ Ireland’s win over All Blacks to be savoured but victory only a means to an end ] [ World Rugby may ask Jaco Peyper to change his tune on several controversial decisions in Ireland’s win over All Blacks ] Jamison Gibson-Park’s recovering speed prevented Scott Barrett latching onto Beauden Barrett’s grubber, earning a scrum for the former’s knock-on, and 13 phases later they struck again. Bundee Aki trucked it up to begin with, and after some good carries Sexton passed a pod of three to free Aki as he linked with Peter O’Mahony. As in the assured build-up to Andrew Porter’s opening third-minute try, Tadhg Beirne took a perfect line onto Sexton’s short, delayed pass to pierce the black line, a few more carries and recycles later Porter burrowed over for his second try. His finish for the first, ploughing through Quinn Tupaea, was even better, and coupled with another industrious performance and winning two of three scrum penalties which Ireland earned, contributed to a redemptive afternoon after his understandable frustrations in the first Test. Thereafter, their defence largely in control through targeting the ball in the tackle or holding up the carrier (Josh van der Flier leading the way as ever with 21 tackles), two more Sexton penalties nudged Ireland over the winning line. Unusually for any team against the All Blacks, Ireland had much the better kicking game. Ian Foster lamented that his side played too much rugby in their own territory, and rather pointedly removed Beauden Barrett in a straight swap for Richie Mo’unga, a rather odd move considering they were playing catch-up and were down a man. Ireland, with 47 per cent possession, enjoyed 64 per cent of territory, with many contributing to their shrewd kicking game – Jamsion Gibson-Park with his pinpoint up-and-unders, while Sexton, Garry Ringrose and Mack Hansen all found grass in the backfield too and of course there was a quick-witted 50:22 by O’Mahony off one of many handling errors by an All Blacks team who, like everyone else under pressure, are mortal. Although Scott Barrett pinched the Dan Sheehan throw, Robbie Henshaw shot off the line to nail Mo’unga with a superb tackle. What’s more, when Sevu Reece went well beyond the ruck to floor Bundee Aki when he went in to contest for the ball, the All Blacks winger was penalised for Sexton effectively seal the deal by making it a three-score game. The All Blacks escaped punishment for similar offences last week, but this was a second penalty for taking out a player beyond the ruck, assistant referee Jordan Way having spotted the first, suggesting Farrell had alerted the officials to this. With the All Blacks’ defence anticipating Sexton would pull passes back or opt for his trademark wraps, those two breaks by Beirne and Porter, for his first try, were from Sexton putting them through the front door. “I was nowhere near where I wanted to be,” admitted Beirne of his first game since the Six Nations a week ago. “I’ve watched that game a few times myself and I knew where I needed to improve and where I didn’t. There were a lot of areas I needed to improve, if I am being honest. I had a massive focus personally to step up my performance. Thankfully I ran a few good lines off Johnny. He’s world-class. He’s just able to see that and put you through those holes.” Scoring sequence: 3 mins Porter try, Sexton con 0-7; 14 mins Sexton pen 0-10; 40 (+1) mins B Barrett try, J Barrett con 7-10; (half-time 7-10); 49 mins Porter try, Sexton con 7-17; 56 mins Sexton pen 7-20; 68 mins Sexton pen 7-23; 78 mins Jordan try 12-23. New Zealand: Jordie Barrett (Hurricanes); Sevu Reece (Crusaders, Tasman), Reiko Ioane (Blues), Quinn Tupaea (Chiefs), Leicester Fainga’anuku (Crusaders); Beauden Barrett (Blues), Aaron Smith (Highlanders); George Bower (Crusaders), Codie Taylor (Crusaders)), Ofa Tu’ungafasi (Blues), Brodie Retallick (Chiefs), Scott Barrett (Crusaders), Dalton Papalii (Blues), Sam Cane (Chiefs, capt), Ardie Savea (Hurricanes). Replacements: Angus Ta’avao (Chiefs) for Papalii (26-31 mins), Aidan Ross (Chiefs) for Savea (31 mins), Patrick Tupulotu (Blues) for (Retallick 48-56 mins), Will Jordan (Crusaders) for Fainga’anuku (49 mins), Samisoni Taukei’aho (Chiefs) for Taylor, Richie Mo’unga (Crusaders) for Beauden Barrett (both 56 mins), Folau Fakatava (Highlanders) for (62 mins), Pita Gus Sowakula (Chiefs) for Papalii (69 mins). Sinbinned: Fainga’anuku (17-27 mins), Tu’ungafasi (25-35 mins). Sent-off: Angus Ta’avao (31 mins). Ireland: Hugo Keenan (Leinster/UCD), Mack Hansen (Connacht), Garry Ringrose (Leinster/UCD), Robbie Henshaw (Leinster/Buccaneers), James Lowe (Leinster); Johnny Sexton (Leinster/St Mary’s College, capt), Jamison Gibson Park (Leinster); Andrew Porter (Leinster/UCD), Dan Sheehan (Leinster/Lansdowne), Tadhg Furlong (Leinster/Clontarf), James Ryan (Leinster/UCD), Tadhg Beirne (Munster/Lansdowne), Peter O’Mahony (Munster/Cork Constitution),Josh van der Flier (Leinster/UCD), Caelan Doris (Leinster/St Mary’s College). Replacements: Bundee Aki (Connacht/Galwegians) for Ringrose (31 mins), Rob Herring (Ulster/Ballynahinch) for Sheehan, Jack Conan (Leinster/Old Belvedere) for Doris (another 64 mins), Cian Healy (Leinster/Clontarf) for Porter, Finlay Bealham (Connacht/Buccaneers) for Furlong (both 64 mins), Kieran Treadwell (Ulster/Ballymena) for Beirne, Conor Murray (Munster/Garryowen) for Gibson-Park (68 mins).Joey Carbery (Munster/Clontarf) for Sexton (73 mins), Conor Murray (Munster/Garryowen) for Gibson-Park (68 mins), Doris for O’Mahony (76 mins). Sinbinned: Ryan 40-50 mins). Referee: Jaco Peyper (SARU)