The shortlist for the 30th Business to Arts Awards has been announced, with partnerships between St Patrick’s Festival and TikTok, An Post and Dublin Pride, and KPMG and Children’s Books Ireland among the potential winners. The shortlist represents corporate-cultural partnerships undertaken and delivered during the pandemic. The Business to Arts Awards recognise creative partnerships between businesses, philanthropists, artists, and arts organisations. The shortlist focuses on arts sponsorship, philanthropy, commissioning of artists, and corporate social responsibility (CSR) initiatives, such as employee and community engagement. The entries were judged by a panel that included representatives from Accenture, The Irish Times, ESB, Mermaid Arts Centre, Daa, Irish Life, the Arts Council, TileStyle, and Arthur Cox. The awards ceremony will take place at the National Concert Hall on September 20th, with a total of €25,000 to be presented through bursaries and awards on the night. This year’s awards include a new Accenture Digital Innovation in Art Bursary, which is designed to support an artist working exclusively in the digital space. “The shortlist for the 30th anniversary of the Business to Arts Awards showcases the incredible resilience and ingenuity of creative partnerships between the corporate and cultural sectors,” said Louise O’Reilly, chief executive of Business to Arts. “The nominees have gone above and beyond to bring art to their communities when they needed it most, often tackling challenging subject matter or providing a creative sanctuary during the pandemic.” Among the awards to be handed out are best large sponsorship, which sees St Patrick’s Festival and TikTok compete against the Dublin Port Company, ANU Productions and Landmark Productions; Zurich and the National Gallery of Ireland with the Crawford Art Gallery; and KPMG and Children’s Books Ireland. The shortlist for the best long-term partnership includes Accenture’s Women on Walls with Dublin City University, Royal College of Surgeons Ireland, and The Royal Irish Academy; the Zurich Portrait Prize and Zurich Young Portrait Prize; KPMG and Children’s Books Ireland; and the National University of Ireland, Galway and Galway International Arts Festival. Other awards include best small sponsorship, the best use of creativity in the community, best use of creativity in the workplace, and best philanthropic support to the arts award. 2022 Business to Arts Awards shortlist: Best Large Sponsorship supported by Arthur Cox Best Small Sponsorship Best Long-Term Partnership supported by The Irish Times Best use of Creativity in the Community supported by Irish Life Best use of Creativity in the Workplace supported by ESB Jim McNaughton Perpetual Award for Best Commissioning Practice supported by TileStyle Best Philanthropic Support to the Arts Award supported by the Arts Council Judges’ Special Recognition Award supported by Accenture