The UK deputy prime minister, Dominic Raab, and the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, have both thrown their weight behind the front-runner, Rishi Sunak, in the race to succeed Boris Johnson as Conservative Party leader. Mr Raab, who had not previously backed a candidate, introduced Mr Sunak as he formally launched his candidacy at an event in Westminster. With the other candidates in a bidding war to promise tax cuts, Mr Raab told the enthusiastic audience: “Just remember this: while others talk the talk, Rishi this month delivered the biggest tax cut for working people in a decade; and he did it because he’s a true Conservative, imbued with the values of enterprise, hard work and family. Rishi’s values are our values.” He also highlighted Mr Sunak’s early support for Brexit, his “seminal” pamphlet on freeports, and his strong poll ratings relative to other candidates. Also appearing on stage was Mr Shapps, who has withdrawn from the Tory leadership race and thrown his weight behind Mr Sunak, after it became clear he was unlikely to secure the backing of the 20 MPs needed to progress to the ballot paper. [ Analysis: Contest could see leader emerge that most Conservative MPs don’t want ] Key supporters including Oliver Dowden, who resigned as party chair after the disastrous Tiverton and Honiton and Wakefield byelections, and the former chief whip Mark Harper, were also present. Mr Sunak has sought to distinguish himself from the rest of the field by declining to promise lavish tax cuts immediately, instead stressing the importance of not believing in “fairytales”. In his own speech, he said it was time for a “grown-up conversation” with the public about the challenges ahead. He said he wanted the campaign to be “a moment where the party and the country came together”. Mr Sunak also sought to explain why he had backed Mr Johnson until last week, saying: “We owe it to the people who elected Boris in 2019 to explain why he is leaving office. “Boris Johnson is one of the remarkable people I’ve ever met, and whatever the commentators say, he has a good heart,” he said, insisting he would not take part in a “rewriting of history” about his premiership. He has secured the most public endorsements from MPs, who will narrow the field down rapidly to two candidates over the next 10 days. Mr Sunak, who resigned last week, said he was bringing “a message of change”. Mr Johnson’s allies Jacob Rees-Mogg and Nadine Dorries have backed foreign secretary Liz Truss for the leadership. Speaking to reporters in Downing Street, the Brexit opportunities minister and the culture secretary gave their backing to Ms Truss to become the next prime minister. Mr Rees-Mogg said Liz Truss has shown “proper Conservatism” in her views when opposing tax rises, which is another reason why he has decided to back her. He told reporters in Downing Street: “I’m also going to be backing Liz Truss. As Nadine said, I think she’s a stronger Brexiteer than either of us and that’s really important. “She has been my strongest supporter in the cabinet in getting Brexit opportunities. When we discussed taxation, Liz was always opposed to Rishi’s higher taxes. That, again, is proper Conservatism. “I think she’s got the character to lead the party and the nation.” Questioned if Ms Truss was the “stop Rishi” candidate, Mr Rees-Mogg said: “Liz Truss is the best candidate, that’s what we’re working for. She’s a proper Eurosceptic, she’ll deliver for the voters and she believes in low taxation.” “And she’s a woman,” Ms Dorries added. Meanwhile, the Labour Party is preparing to force a confidence vote on the government, challenging Conservative MPs to oust Mr Johnson as they hold a leadership contest. The opposition will table the motion on Tuesday, with the aim of holding the vote the following day, according to party sources. Mr Johnson resigned as Conservative Party leader after a long line of scandals but is clinging on to office as caretaker prime minister until a replacement is found in a move that has divided Tory MPs. Labour’s bid would force Mr Johnson’s colleagues to either back the government or vote against it. Tory MPs will be wary that opposing the government could trigger a general election at a time they are selecting a new leader, and risk losing the large Commons majority Mr Johnson won in 2019. The confidence vote, which would require a simple majority to pass, will put on record where leadership contenders and their colleagues in the Commons stand on Mr Johnson staying in office over the next two months. But now the Conservative Party has set out its timetable for a replacement to be announced on September 5th, the clamour for Mr Johnson’s immediate exit has been dampened. That the motion is in Labour’s name makes Tory support even less likely. — Guardian/PA