Rumours, rumours, rumours. The mill just keeps churning them out. Did you hear the one about next week’s historic 150th Open being the last one to be played over the Old Course? “I don’t think this is the last,” said Shane Lowry of such a prospect, even with a forecast heat wave edging in the direction of St Andrews for a week which is likely to make for an ideal tournament atmosphere but also offers the prospect of low scoring. The record low round in the Open is that of Brandon Grace, a 62 which came at Royal Birkdale in 2017 beating all of those who’d previously signed for 63s. There have been two 63s on the Old Course, the first by Paul Broadhurst in 1990 and then equalled by Rory McIlroy in 2010. The record low total for an Open at St Andrews is the 19-under-par total of 269 by Tiger Woods in 2000. “If the weather is good, scoring will be decent. You still have to get it around, there’s some tricky holes. Yes, there are some greens that certain people can drive. There’s also lots of big pot bunkers waiting for you if you don’t hit good tee shots. I’m sure they are going to try and set it up as tricky as they’ve ever set it up. They’ll have the toughest pins as they’ve ever had at St Andrews. “I’m sure they’re a bit worried themselves that someone could shoot 59. But you still have to go out and play golf. It’s still a Major championship and it’s the Open but I don’t see 20-under winning. There will be a bit of wind. It will be firm. It will be tricky. There will be good scores but there’s no harm in that, to be honest. Jack Nicklaus shot 63 or 64 the odd time when he was playing. It’s okay if we do it as well. I don’t think it will be the last Open at St Andrews, definitely!” said Lowry, winner of the Claret Jug when it was held at Royal Portrush in 2019. Lowry — speaking at the announcement of a three-year sponsorship deal with Jameson to act as the whiskey company’s global ambassador — is one of the favourites heading into the historic 150th edition of golf’s oldest Major championship but doesn’t feel any extra weight on his shoulders. As he put it: “I don’t really mind it, at this stage, to be honest. It doesn’t matter if you are 8-1 or 180-1, it is what it is and it is just you against the golf course when you get out there and then you against your own head and your own mental battle against yourself. Everything that it takes to win a Major, it is you against all of that and I certainly wouldn’t be throwing any expectation in just because people fancy me to win because I have more expectation on myself than anybody else has over me.”