Sir, – Elaine Byrne (Letters, July 5th) writes about the disruption she experiences when there are concerts in Marlay Park in Dublin. She says that Marlay Park is not a suitable venue for concerts because it is surrounded by residential areas. The park is over 200 acres in size, similar to Malahide Castle and St Anne’s Park, both of which are also surrounded by residential areas, and regularly feature concerts and other cultural events. Every park in Dublin city is, more or less, surrounded by residential areas. So too, indeed, are many other concert venues like Croke Park, the Aviva Stadium, the 3 Arena, etc. Without checking the comparative demographics of Ballinteer versus Clontarf or Sandymount, it’s safe to say every part of Dublin has elderly people in it (as well as families with young children whose sleep might be disturbed). Where, precisely, does Ms Byrne think we should hold concerts in the city? As for public transport being crowded on occasions when concerts are taking place, would Ms Byrne prefer the attendees of Longitude drive? I’m fairly confident the lives of residents would be disrupted to a much greater extent by 40,000 people trying to find parking nearby. It seems Ms Byrne would rather see no concerts take place in Marlay Park than suffer crowded buses on a few summer evenings. Compare this to the reasonable suggestion from other correspondents that more public transport be provided on occasions when concerts are taking place. Finally, the noise of concerts is doubtless an inconvenience. But this is an entirely reasonable trade-off for people who are lucky enough to live beside such a wonderful amenity as Marlay Park to pay. I’m sure the presence of Marlay Park on one’s doorstep is high up on the list of reasons many local residents give for choosing to live there. For 11 months of the year, the people of Ballinteer, Rathfarnham and beyond have unfettered daily access to 200 acres of woodland and meadow. I’m sure most of them do not begrudge others the use of the park for concerts a few days during the summer. The park is maintained for everyone’s use by Dún Laoghaire-Rathdown County Council, which inevitably must raise money to pay for its upkeep. The alternative to holding concerts in the park is raising taxes, which would bring none of the “enjoyment and employment” that a concert does. I suggest Ms Byrne copy those of us privileged enough to live within earshot of Croke Park of a summer evening – head out to the garden, sit back and enjoy the music. – Yours, etc, ALAN EUSTACE, Marino, Dublin 9. Sir, – Recent letters from readers complaining of nuisance and inconvenience caused by a concert in Marlay Park are symptomatic of a practice that has been occurring in public areas around Dublin in recent years. Public spaces are being temporarily closed for the benefit of commercial organisations seeking private profit. This has occurred not only in Marlay Park but in the Phoenix Park, St Anne’s Park, Fairview Park, the Iveagh Gardens and the Royal Hospital Kilmainham. This seems to be occurring with the full approval of all our public representatives and with very little regard to the erosion of the public’s entitlement to free access to these spaces. Will no one shout stop? – Yours, etc, LOUIS O’FLAHERTY, Santry, Dublin 9.