Sir, – It is claimed that with regard to Dublin’s decades-late first metro line, “a credible, stress-tested indicative cost” put the price in the “region of €9.5 billion” (News, July 5th). In what way are we to believe that is a credible number? Denmark, a country with even higher costs than Ireland, built a 15km metro in Copenhagen between 2011 and 2019 for about €2.9 billion. Are we to believe that Dublin is so uniquely overpriced that a 19km line will be over three times the cost of Copenhagen’s line? The cost of an American Ohio-class ballistic missile submarine is $3 billion. The British have managed to build a Queen Elizabeth-class aircraft carrier for £3.8 billion. Has the National Transport Authority considered perhaps declining to make Metrolink out of gold and diamonds and instead perhaps invest in a few spare American submarines with the leftover change? The words “credible” and “€9.5 billion” hardly belong in the same sentence. We need a no-frills metro system, not a ridiculously overengineered and costly white elephant that will never be sanctioned at such extortionate cost. – Yours, etc, BRYAN O’DONOGHUE, Glasnevin, Dublin 9. Sir, – In addition to the huge sums already spent, several hundred millions were already spent bringing Metro mark one to shovel ready, which was cancelled after the 2008 crash. Throughout all of this time (and before), Irish Rail has had proposals to link the airport by heavy rail to the capital, and in doing so, connect the rest of our country to Dublin Airport, at a cost of between €250 million and €500 million. Because most of the land required is clear (sterilised because it’s under the flightpath), this project could be delivered relatively quickly. At present we are the only European capital or major city (even Inverness has an airport rail link) without a train to the airport! Why? Because the DAA has shown no support (car parking revenue), the National Transport Authority is hung up on Light Rail including Metrolink (and buses) and will not support what would be a serious lifeline for Irish Rail. Sadly, Metrolink will never happen because it’s too expensive and controversial and we will continue to have an airport with no train service – and wonder why. – Yours, etc, JIM DEEGAN, (Former board member, National Transport Authority), Dublin 1. Sir, – The proposed metro linking Dublin city and Dublin Airport is expected to cost ¤9.5 billion. To think you will have to sell your house to travel 20 metres. – Yours, etc, EUGENE TANNAM, Dublin 24.