Japan 15 France 20 France had to rally again in the second half to beat Japan for a second successive week as they edged the home team in Saturday’s second test in Tokyo. Baptiste Couilloud’s try 10 minutes from time turned an error-strewn contest back in France’s favour after Japan fullback Ryohei Yamanaka had dotted down two first-half tries at the National Olympic Stadium for a 15-7 half-time lead. Matthis Lebel scored France’s other try with a penalty and conversion each from Maxime Lucu and Matthieu Jalibert. Seung-sin Lee kicked over a penalty and conversion for Japan. France, without many of the key players who helped them to Six Nations success earlier in the year, had won last weekend’s first Test at Aichi 42-23. France were first to score in a lively start with a long pass out wide putting winger Lebel over in the corner in the ninth minute. The home response was both immediate and spectacular as a Japan turned a long kick downfield from the French to a slick counterattack, with smart handling from centre Dylan Riley, before Yamanaka finished off a sweeping move for a try three minutes later. Outhalf Lee, who kept his place following an impressive first Test showing after being pressed into last-minute service, put over a 19th minute penalty to nudge Japan 8-7 ahead and then quick hands ensured a second try on the stroke of half-time, just a slick as the first, with a break from Michael Leitch setting up Yamanaka, with Lee converting for a 15-7 lead. Japan were caught offside to allow France to reduce the deficit with a Lucu penalty five minutes into the second half and Jalibert took France to within two points with another penalty on the hour mark. France took the lead again in the 70th minute with a solo try from replacement scrumhalf Couilloud, picking the ball out of the scrum and sprinting some 25 metres to put the ball down under the posts and a 20-15 advantage. Within minutes, Japan won a penalty, went for a lineout near the French line and looked to have scored as Tevita Tatafu bowled his way through their defence but a television replay showed he lost control of the ball as he went over the line. It was the costliest of the many handling errors that characterised the second half, robbing the hosts of possible victory. France achieved their objective in winning their two-test series over Japan by giving test experience to many of their fringe players, coach Fabien Galthie said after Saturday’s narrow 20-15 second test victory in Tokyo. France left many of their regulars, including World Player of the year Antoine Dupont, at home for their two matches in Japan and in both tests had to fight their way back to ensure victory. “The objective with this team was to win the matches we had on the programme and that we did,” said France coach Fabien Galthie. “That was the important thing for us, the staff. If we take young players on tour with an eye on development, we had to succeed in bringing them to this level of performance and that is why the objective was achieved.” “It was a very difficult match as everyone could see, with a comeback after half-time where we were trailing by eight points. “It was also the first time this season that we were trailing before the break and conceding a try just before the half-time. “We have a young team and it was interesting to see how they would react. And then in the second half, they did react and score. There are a lot of positive things in the second half that allowed us to win this match.” France host next year’s World Cup and now look forward to Tests in November at home against Australia, world champions South Africa and Japan.