PayPal is proposing to cut a total of 307 from its Irish operations in Dundalk and Dublin, the company said. Staff were told on Tuesday morning of the changes, which a company spokesperson said were not due to any specific economic conditions. “We are proposing to remove a selection of roles in Dundalk and Dublin subject to consultation with employees and we notified employees in the affected teams of the consultation earlier today,” the spokesperson said. “We are looking at how do we make changes that maybe necessary to shape the business for the future for our next wave of growth, so making sure we have got the scale, we can scale to meet the evolving needs of our customers.” “There is no one single aspect I can point to. It is not a particular response to an economic condition. We are looking at the business as a whole,” the spokesperson added. Roles Staff in Dundalk and Dublin were informed, some during a Microsoft Teams call, of what was proposed. Up to 172 of the roles affected are in Dundalk, with the rest in Dublin. “We are proposing to remove a selection of roles in Dundalk and Dublin subject to consultation with employees and we notified employees in the effected teams of the consultation earlier today, ” the company said. It is understood that some work is being relocated, possibly to Asia, while other positions are being axed. “We are just going to start the consultation process with our employees. It would not really be right for me to go into details of what the changes might be in detail, ” the spokesperson said. “We remain committed to Dundalk and Dublin and Ireland as a whole. This does not change our absolute commitment to Ireland and Dundalk and Dublin.” “We are committed to ensure that anyone who leaves under the proposed changes is treated fairly and generously , that is really important thing for us.” After the changes are implemented, there will still be over 2,000 people working for the company in Ireland spread between both locations. A number of local TDs said they were in contact with Mr Jan Egar, PayPal, head of government relations UK & Ireland. News Reacting to the news Louth Sinn Fein deputy Ruairí Ó Murchú said job losses will “have a huge impact on the families. It is also going to be very worrying for anybody working in PayPal at this time no matter what promises are made.” “Now is not the time that anybody would like to be losing a job. We have seen the cost of everything whether fuel, shopping, rental situation and the cost of housing.” Louth deputy Peter Fitzpatrick said: “This is very disappointing for Dundalk and staff who have shown great commitment and loyalty to PayPal. I am awaiting more information and I will do my best to reverse this decision and make sure that workers are treated fairly.”