Two north Dublin TDs are amongst those to express concerns over the planned demolition of the Baily Court hotel in Howth to make way for a €63 million apartment scheme. Denise Mitchell (Sinn Féin) and Cian O’Callaghan (Social Democrat) have both lodged submissions with An Bord Pleanála concerning Patrick Crean’s Marlet’s plan for 180 apartments on Howth’s main street. Over 50 objections have been lodged by locals against Balscadden GP3 Ltd’s fast-track’ scheme that is to be made up of four residential blocks ranging in height from two to five storeys . It will also have with two retail units and one café/retail unit. Objections A number of the objections have been lodged by residents’ groups including the Howth and Sutton Community Council. As part of the proposal, the developer has put an indicative price tag of €6.3 million on the sale of 18 apartments to Fingal County Council to comply with its social housing obligations. A two-bed apartment has the indicative price of €657,413. The overall scheme is made up of four studios, 62 one-bed units,  89 two-bed apartments and 24 three bed units. In his submission, Mr O’Callaghan said that while he welcomed the development of the lands to provide housing, he had a number of serious concerns over the plan. He said that he opposed the demolition of the Baily Court Hotel as it was of significant historical value. He also pointed out that a scheme on the former Techrete site would cater for the rental sector and that he would prefer it the proposed scheme to have a mix of option for customers. Ms Mitchell along with party colleague, Cllr Larry O’Toole said that there was a serious housing crisis in Ireland and they were not opposed to the principle of housing at the location. However, they said that they had serious concerns over the scheme. They said that the proposal “would be seriously detrimental to the streetscape of this unique and historic village”. Howth needs social and affordable housing, the two said, but there is no guarantee that the apartments would be affordable. Identity In their objection, the Howth and Sutton Community Council argue that the sheer scale of the scheme would dominate the village square and ruin its unique historical identity. In a planning statement accompanying the application, planning consultants for Marlet, Brady Shipman Martin, said that the scheme would “create a richly landscaped urban setting with an efficient use of land, promoting sustainable densities, with the aim of creating a high quality residential development”. The consultants said that the proposed development was “designed and laid out to ensure minimal impact on adjacent residential buildings . . . and keep below the height established by the Martello Tower”. An appeals board decision is due in July.