Hailed as the “biggest Irish language demonstration of a generation”, the An Lá Dearg event at the weekend in Belfast was planned just under two months ago due to mounting concerns about stalled legislation. An estimated 10,000 protesters marched through the city on Saturday calling for the immediate introduction of Irish language legislation, while celebrating the “community revival” of the language in the North. School children, youth workers, community organisations and sports clubs were among activists who walked from west Belfast to the city centre in a rally organised by campaign group, An Dream Dearg. Among those addressing the crowds at Belfast City Hall was five-year-old Daíthí Mac Gabhann, an Irish speaker who needs a heart transplant and was the face of a successful campaign to change the law on organ donation in Northern Ireland earlier this year. Chants by protesters included “tir gan teanga, tir gan anam”, which translates as “a country without a language is a country without a soul”. The UK government is this week expected to announce a draft Bill on a cultural package – including protection for the Irish language – almost a year after a similar commitment was given to introduce it before an October 2021 deadline. Ciarán Mac Giolla Bhéin from An Dream Dearg described Saturday’s massive turnout as “inspiring stuff”. He told The Irish Times the grassroots movement had “decided to mobilise in big numbers again” – a similar rally took place in 2017 – as a result of “increasing concerns” the “promised legislation wasn’t happening”. Language revival “What we witnessed on Saturday was a sea of positivity. Our group is ultimately about the language revival and we’re seeing the very positive impact the legislation has had in Wales; we’re saying, why can’t we be afforded the same? We know there’s been a commitment from the British government since 2006 following the St Andrew’s Agreement. “The protest had two purposes; the first was around making the very strong case for language legislation but also as importantly, the second was about celebrating the community revival of the language, the genesis of which goes back to the kickstart of the school movement 50 years ago. “In terms of the logistical organisation for the rally, there was a six to seven week turnaround – which is incredible.” Legal protections for the Irish language in the North were a key plank of the New Decade, New Approach agreement that restored Stormont in January 2020 following a three-year collapse. Increased support They were included in a broader package of cultural laws that include an Office of Identity and Cultural Expression to promote respect for diversity as well as an Irish Language Commissioner and a commissioner to develop language, arts and literature associated with the Ulster Scots/Ulster British tradition. Despite a commitment given by the British prime minister, Boris Johnson, on the legislation, Mr Mac Giolla Bhéin said they will “reflect where things stand” once they’ve had sight of the draft Bill. He added: “This legislation doesn’t represent our ultimate goal. The idea of language planning and language legislation is that you incrementally build on it. “Our group will be ensuring we continue to push for increased support of the language and increased recognition. Given the history of where we live and what we’ve been through, we have to be eternally vigilant. We know there will be serious and ongoing efforts to obstruct the legislation – particularly from the DUP – and try to weaken it. “As citizens we’re obliged to continue to hold politicians to account to ensure that when rights are committed to and legislated for, they are implemented to their full.”