Séamus Power couldn’t quite match the outstanding display put on by Sebastian Munoz in the opening round of the AT&T Byron Nelson Classic at TPC Craig Ranch in McKinney, Texas, but – a year on from the top-10 finish in the same tournament that kickstarted his rise from 437th to 41st in the world rankings – the Waterford man again showed his liking for the Tom Weiskopf-designed course. In a fine display of shot-making and possessing a particularly hot putter in a round of six-under-par 66, Power made a strong start to the €8.6 million tournament where Colombia’s Munoz claimed the clubhouse lead with a sizzling round of 60, that included a back-nine homeward run of 28. For Power, who is in the field for next week’s US PGA Championship, it was a case of continuing a strong run of form: he had seven birdies and just one bogey in his round, as he navigated his way to the business part of the leaderboard. Unfortunately Corkman John Murphy, playing on a sponsor’s invitation, struggled on the front nine – where he had four bogeys – and ultimately signed for an opening round of 76, four-over-par. Munoz had also managed a 60 in the early-season RSM Classic and claimed another one with an aggressive display that enabled him to open up a four-stroke clubhouse lead over Mito Pereira and Peter Malnati. “I just kept it going. I wanted to get more looks and more looks and more chances, and I just kind of went crazy with it,” said Munoz of his round. On the DP World Tour, England’s Callum Shinkwin defied a wrist injury – which had him considering withdrawing from the tournament – to sign for an opening round 65 that gave him a share of the lead with his compatriots Dale Whitnell and Sam Horsfield in the Soudal Belgian Open at Rinkven International Golf Club in Antwerp. “I went into the (tournament) office to see if there was a first reserve around and they said they were in already and had no one else there, so go play if you can and if you can’t just walk in. “Four holes in I was like ‘it’s not looking good’, and then I shot six-under. It’s nerve damage we think, but nothing a bit of paracetamol can’t fix,” said Shinkwin. Niall Kearney proved best of the Irish trio, with the Dubliner opening with a 69 (in tied-26th), while Jonny Caldwell signed for a 70. Cormac Sharvin faces a battle to survive the cut after an opening round 73.