Gardaí investigating the murder of mother of two Lisa Thompson in her home in north Dublin last week have appealed to a man who had a document in her name and handed it in to gardaí, to come forward as a matter of urgency. Ms Thompson was found dead in her home on Sandyhill Gardens, Ballymun, last Tuesday, May 10th. She had been violently attacked, suffering a large number of stab wounds. The document, which belonged to the 52-year-old mother of two, was brought by an unidentified man to Finglas Garda station last Thursday, two days after Ms Thompson’s remains were found having lain undiscovered in her home for a number of days. Gardaí did not realise the document was linked to Ms Thompson when it was surrendered to them just after 7am last Thursday at the station, about 4km from the murder scene. Investigators are now appealing to the man who handed it in to come forward. Detectives are keen to establish where the document was found, and whether the location and other circumstances of its discovery might aid the murder investigation. “A male handed a document in the name of the deceased Lisa Thompson to a Garda staff member at the front door of Finglas Garda station and left on foot,” a statement from Garda Headquarters, Phoenix Park, Dublin, said. The man who had the document was asked to “make urgent contact” with the investigation team at Ballymun Garda station on (01) 666 4400. Gardaí are studying the close relationships Ms Thompson had developed in recent months, as part of the efforts to identify her killer. They believe she had befriended a number of people dealing in tablets sold on the illicit drugs market, and are trying to establish if her murder was in any way linked to that trade, even indirectly. A concerned neighbour raised the alarm by calling 999, seeking an ambulance, just after 3pm on Tuesday. When paramedics arrived at the house they called gardaí and the murder was discovered. Her children, a boy and girl aged about 12 and 14 years, were not living at the house with their mother, who lived alone at the property. Ms Thompson was originally from Ballymun, had gone to school there and also previously had a position in youth work in the area, though she was not in that role at the time of her murder.