Taoiseach Micheál Martin has said the UK government has moved “too far in a unilateral way” over its approach to the Northern Ireland protocol, which was not in accordance with the spirit of the Belfast Agreement. The Taoiseach is in Belfast for talks aimed at breaking the political deadlock caused by unionist concerns over the Northern Ireland protocol and restoring a functioning Assembly and Executive at Stormont. The mood in Dublin over the UK’s approach to the post-Brexit protocol continued to darken ahead of Mr Martin’s meetings with Northern political party leaders and business representatives. The threat remains of unilateral action by the UK government – which has said it will soon begin legislating to set aside parts of the protocol it agreed as part of the UK’s departure from the EU. Irish officials and politicians, who have been in contact with their counterparts in London, expressed pessimism about finding a solution in the weeks ahead. Mr Martin spoke to European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen and Alliance Party leader Naomi Long on Thursday about the situation. Officials said he and Ms Von der Leyen agreed that what was being proposed by London was unacceptable. Speaking to the BBC on Friday morning, Mr Martin said: “I spoke to Boris Johnson and I have to nail this, this idea that somehow the European Union is being inflexible on this is just not the truth, it doesn’t stack up. “What has happened now is a certain unilateralism on behalf of the British government saying ‘our way or no way’ and you don’t negotiate with the European Union on that basis, particularly when you have signed off on the agreement that you now don’t like. “Professional, serious negotiations between the United Kingdom government and the European Union is the only way to resolve this.” DUP protest Mr Martin also said there cannot be a situation where one political party is refusing to allow the Northern Ireland Assembly to meet, saying it is “unheard of in a democratic world”. Following this month’s Northern Irish election, the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) blocked the appointment of a speaker at Stormont as part of its protest over the protocol, which means the Assembly cannot sit and there is only a caretaker Executive with limited powers. Ahead of his party’s meeting with the Taoiseach, DUP leader Jeffrey Donaldson warned it was time for Dublin to “belatedly recognise that if nothing is fixed then there will be no progress”. He said the protocol, designed to avoid a hard border on the island of Ireland, had “damaged both Northern Ireland’s economic and democratic arrangements” and “must be replaced by arrangements that can command the support of unionists as well as nationalists”. On Friday, however, Mr Martin said: “I think most people would agree that in the democratic world when people vote for their representatives and vote to elect a parliament, the first thing that happens is that parliament should convene. “We can’t have a situation where one political party determines that the other political parties can’t convene in a parliament. I understand there are legitimate issues that have been issued in respect of the protocol. We have accepted that for quite some time.” Mr Martin added: “Decisive action was taken by the European Union last October, significant advances on a whole range of issues as the basis for further discussions. “The British government did not respond in any meaningful way to the proposals that were put forward by the European Commission. The challenge that I see here is that the goalposts keep on changing in respect of the protocol, or where the landing zone for a resolution of the legitimate issues that have been raised by people are.” Truss Minister for Foreign Affairs Simon Coveney said he has “made clear” to UK foreign secretary Liz Truss that the Irish Government opposes the UK breaching international law. Simon Coveney made the comment after meeting Ms Truss on Friday about ongoing concerns around the protocol. He tweeted: “I made clear Ireland’s opposition to the UK breaching international law. “The UK needs to get back to talks with the EU.” Speaking ahead of their meeting, Mr Coveney said “there can be no ambiguity” that Ms Truss was proposing to “break international law deliberately” through the legislation over-riding parts of the protocol. Ms Truss has said she intends to publish a legal statement backing up her plans. “She can justify that if she wants to in the House of Commons in terms of British law, but there is no ambiguity in my mind that this is a government choosing to legislate in a way to set aside international law that they themselves have been responsible for designing, ratifying and agreeing,” he said. – Additional reporting PA