What? It was back in January, you might recall, that Fifa president Gianni Infantino got himself in to some bother when he addressed the European Council and touched upon the subject of Fifa’s proposal for a biennial World Cup. While he complained later that his remarks were taken out of context, he did indeed mention in the same breath a biennial World Cup and the need “to find ways to give hope to Africans so they don’t have to cross the Mediterranean in order to find a better life but more probably death in the sea”. To which much of the planet replied: “What?” You’d imagine, then, he’d steer clear of sharing his thoughts on such issues. Hold yer horses. Last week he was at a business conference in the United States and was asked about the plight of migrant workers in Qatar. “My parents emigrated from Italy to Switzerland – not so far, but still,” he replied. “When you give work to someone, even in hard conditions, you give him dignity and pride.” Some consolation, then, for the families of the estimated 6,500 workers who died during the construction of Qatar’s World Cup stadiums. At least they enjoyed dignity and pride before they met their makers. Sometimes you’d almost miss Sepp Blatter. Word of Mouth (I): Shilton dishes out “I wouldn’t even use it around the house, not even to clean the dishes in my bungalow.” Peter Shilton on the jersey worn by Diego Maradona in the Hand of God game – considering it sold for €8.4 million last week, that would have been the mother of all dishcloths. “Liverpool do not have a world-class player. When Salah was in Italy he was a good player, but not world-class.” Former Italy coach Arrigo Sacchi. Salah left Italy in 2017, has Sacchi seen Liverpool since? “I started off as a right back for my local team but my uncle took over and moved me up front. I’m glad he did that, I didn’t want to be another Gary Neville. ” Robbie Keane risking never being invited back by Sky Sports. “A day only God can explain.” Spanish paper Marca’s take on that Real Madrid comeback. You’d guess even She would struggle to explain it. By the numbers 84 - That’s how many seconds there were between Rodrygo’s first and second goals against Manchester City. Football? Bloody hell. Quote of the week Real Madrid’s Rodrygo explaining that it was divine intervention that had him scoring those late, late goals against Manchester City Word of Mouth (II): Peter in a pickle “Their first chance was the first goal in the 90th minute, the second goal was the second chance and the third goal was the third time they hit the target. Real Madrid have got no right to be in that final.” Peter Schmeichel, forgetting how football works. “Rodrygo is a very good and special boy. He brings a lot to the team when he comes off the bench.” Luka Modric speaking before last Wednesday. Mystic Meg, that lad. “When I’m in my rocking chair, with Weetabix running down my chin, I’ll be thinking of the scenes on this day.” Joey Barton after his Bristol Rovers side beat Scunthorpe 7-0 to pip Northampton to automatic promotion from League Two on goal difference – with a 38-year-old Glenn Whelan running the show from midfield. “I don’t want us to be seen as a yo-yo club. From now on, I just want us to be a yo club.” Fulham co-owner Tony Khan hoping that promotion to the Premier League won’t be followed by relegation back to the Championship in 12 months. Yo. That bed had better be really comfy Scalper of the Week: We could have gone for any of the airlines, ticket ‘re-sellers’ or hotels cashing in on the desire of Rangers and Eintracht Frankfurt fans to attend the Europa League final in Seville, but we’ll go for the fella who’s Airbnbing his one bed apartment in the city. A very pleasant looking abode it is too, a snip at €80 for a single night a week after the final. But for the night of the game? It’ll set you back . . . €2,500. Generally, you wouldn’t wish burst pipes on anyone, but…