Healthcare giant Merck is planning a major €440 million investment to expand its Cork-based manufacturing facilities, which will create more than 370 new jobs by 2027. Eoin Burke-Kennedy has the details. With the European Central Bank poised to increase interest rates in July,the window of opportunity to fix your mortgage rate at the current low levels is about to close and borrowers should consider locking in now, writes Rachel McGovern, director of financial services at Brokers Ireland in our Opinion piece. About 90 per cent of Irish construction firms say they will no longer take on fixed-price contracts given the rapid increase in raw material costs, according to a new survey from the Construction Industry Federation. Eoin Burke-Kennedy reports. Cold calling is back after a pandemic hiatus and it’s worse than ever, according to FT columnist Pilita Clark. Who pays more in tax each year, workers in the North or the Republic? Eoin Burke-Kennedy draws on a new study that provides some interesting talking points. Irish investors are line for a ¤25 million payout following the sale of Spanish solar electricity plants by green electricity developer Arclight, writes Barry O’Halloran. Job postings on recruitment website Indeed are currently 57 per cent above pre-pandemic levels, a reflection the current strength of the Irish labour market. Eoin Burke-Kennedy has the details. Executives across a range of sectorsare seeking to reskill following the Covid-19 pandemic, according to the UCD Smurfit School, whose executive development arm is celebrating its highest ever placing in a Financial Times ranking. Colin Gleeson reports. Healthcare communications platform Wellola has raised €1 million in funding from BVP as the company eyes growth in Britain and Germany. Ciara O’Brien has the details. The resilience of the Irish business sector in the face of rising costs has been highlighted in a new survey, which indicated that nearly three quarters of companies here reported either stable or improving sales in the first quarter of this year. Eoin Burke-Kennedy examines the findings. Stay up to date with all our business news: sign up to our business news alerts and our Business Today daily email news digest.