The European Commission is preparing a sixth package of sanctions against Russia that includes a possible embargo on buying Russian oil. It comes after a major shift on Monday by Germany, Russia’s biggest energy customer, which said it was prepared to back an immediate EU embargo on Russian oil. Green Party leader Eamon Ryan said on Tuesday the sanctions were likely to be agreed by the EU later this week but the nature of those sanctions was not decided. Mr Ryan told Newstalk Breakfast Russian president Vladimir Putin was using energy as a weapon, and said: “He is looking to divide and conquer.” The Minister for the Environment said there would be a doubling-down on efforts to switch reliance on oil and gas, and co-operation on switching to renewables so that countries did not rely on Russia. However, Mr Ryan acknowledged some countries such as Hungary were in difficult circumstances as they depended on Russian crude oil. There would have to be measures to transfer and share oil in some cases, he said. “We have to ensure that sanctions don’t damage Europe more than Russia.” Mr Ryan said he was hopeful that a Europe-wide recession could be avoided, but “if the gas is switched off”, some economies would suffer. The Minister said that while Ireland was not reliant on Russian oil or gas, an increase in prices would have an impact. When asked about images on Russian State television of a simulated nuclear attack on the UK and Ireland, Mr Ryan said it was “shocking” and that Irish diplomats in Moscow would respond. He also expressed concern that May 9th, the anniversary of the end of the second World War, could lead to a “step up” in “war mongering” by Russia. Exemptions Slovakia said on Tuesday it would seek an exemption from any embargo on oil. Two European Union officials said on Monday the EU executive may spare Slovakia and Hungary from the embargo, mindful of the two countries’ dependence on Russian crude. Slovakia gets nearly all of its imported crude from Russia, and the country has said it had reserves for 120 days. The Slovakian economic ministry said processing of different types of oil was not immediately possible and a switch of technology was difficult financially and time-consuming. Kyiv says Russia’s energy exports to Europe are funding the Kremlin war effort with millions of euro every day. “This package should include clear steps to block Russia’s revenues from energy resources,” Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy said in his nightly video address. German economy minister Robert Habeck said: “We have managed to reach a situation where Germany is able to bear an oil embargo.” Chancellor Olaf Scholz, who has been more cautious than other Western leaders in backing Ukraine, has been under growing pressure to take a firmer line. Mr Scholz vowed sanctions would not be lifted until Russian president Vladimir Putin signs a peace deal with Ukraine that Kyiv can support, he said in an interview with ZDF public television. Weaning Europe off Russian oil is likely to be easier than reducing dependence on Russian natural gas. Moscow has demanded European customers pay for gas in roubles, which the EU rejects. Last week, Moscow cut off supplies to Poland and Bulgaria. EU ministers meeting on Monday warned that complying in full with Moscow’s demand for gas payments in roubles would breach existing EU sanctions. Shelling The northeastern city of Kharkiv was under bombardment, the Ukrainian military said on Tuesday, after the city was shelled five times on Monday, injuring five people, according to regional governor Oleh Sinehubov. Giving an early update on battle front, Ukraine’s general staff said its forces were defending the approach to Kharkiv from Izyum, a town on the Donets river, some 120km to the southeast, as the enemy left a trail of destruction in Luhansk province. After being forced to abandon an assault on Kyiv at the end of March, Russia launched a major offensive in eastern Ukraine focused on the Donetsk and Luhansk provinces, parts of which were already held by Russian-backed separatists before the invasion. Russian troops are now trying to encircle a large Ukrainian force there, attacking from three directions with massive bombardment along the front. Ukraine’s military said on Monday Russian forces were trying to take over the frontline Luhansk province town of Rubizhne and prepare an assault on nearby Sievierodonetsk. The heaviest clashes were taking place around Popasna, further south. Shelling was so intense it was not possible to collect bodies, said regional governor Serhiy Gaidai. “I don’t even want to speak about what’s happening with the people living in Popasna, Rubizhne and Novotoshkivske right now. These cities simply don’t exist anymore. They have completely destroyed them.” Russia has also been striking targets far from the frontline with missiles. A 14-year-old boy was killed and a 17-year-old girl was wounded in a missile strike in the southern port of Odesa when a missile hit a dormitory, Mr Zelenskiy said. – Additional reporting Reuters