Over 25,000 tickets have already been sold for Leinster’s semi-final clash against fellow European heavyweights Toulouse in next Saturday’s Heineken Champions Cup at the Aviva Stadium (kick-off 3pm). Tickets for the semi-final are not part of the season ticket pack, yet the first 20,000 of those were sold to Leinster season ticket holders, and such a strong early uptake suggests this mouthwatering match-up between the four and five time winners may yet have the atmosphere it deserves. This is despite the tournament organisers foisting the semi-finals on to the schedule just a week after the quarter-finals for the first time ever. Both Cian Healy and Jimmy O’Brien were removed for a head injury assessment in the second half against Leicester Tigers and will follow the return to play protocols this week. If O’Brien does not make it then his namesake Tommy looks next in line given he made his European debut off the bench in Welford Road, while Jordan Larmour will look to increase his training load this week as he continues to rehab a hip injury and will be further assessed as the week continues. Max Deegan is also now available for selection this week after recovering from a shoulder injury, while Nick McCarthy will be further assessed this week for a shoulder injury before a final decision is made on his availability. There are no further updates on James Tracy (neck), Dave Kearney (hamstring) and Will Connors (knee). England’s Karl Dickson has been appointed to referee the Leinster-Toulouse semi-final, and his assistants will be the English pair of Christophe Ridley and Anthony Woodthorpe. Matthew Carley, also of England, will take charge of the all-French confrontation on Sunday between Racing 92 and La Rochelle at Stade Bollaert-Delelis in Lens where England’s Luke Pearce and Nika Amashukeli of Georgia will run the line. Two Irish referees will be in charge of the EPCR Challenge Cup semi-finals. Lyon’s game against Wasps at the Matmut Stadium de Gerland will be refereed by Frank Murphy, who will be assisted by Sam Grove-White of Scotland and Eoghan Cross of Ireland. Ireland’s Brian MacNiece will act as TMO. Later the same evening, Ireland’s Andrew Brace will be in the middle when Toulon take on Saracens at Stade Félix Mayol and he will have Craig Evans of Wales and Chris Busby of Ireland as his two assistants. Joy Neville has been named TMO for the game. Heineken Champions Cup semi-finals Leinster v Toulouse, Saturday, Aviva Stadium, 3.0 Referee: Karl Dickson (Eng); Assistant referees: Christophe Ridley (Eng), Anthony Woodthorpe (Eng); TMO: Stuart Terheege (Eng); Citing Commissioner: Beth Dickens (Sco). Racing 92 v La Rochelle, Sunday, Stade Bollaert-Delelis, Lens , 4.0 (3.0 Irish time) Referee: Matthew Carley (Eng); Assistant referees: Luke Pearce (Eng), Nika Amashukeli (Geo); TMO: Ian Tempest (Eng); Citing Commissioner: Chris Catling (Eng) Challenge Cup semi-finals Lyon v Wasps, Saturday , Matmut Stadium de Gerland, 1.30 (12.30 Irish time) Referee: Frank Murphy (Ire); Assistant referees: Sam Grove-White (Sco), Eoghan Cross (Ire); TMO: Brian MacNeice (Ire); Citing Commissioner: Tim Lowry (Ire) Toulon v Saracens, Saturday, Stade Félix Mayol 9.0m(8.0 Irish time) Referee: Andrew Brace (Ire); Assistant referees: Craig Evans (Wal), Chris Busby (Ire); TMO: Joy Neville (Ire); Citing Commissioner: Jeff Mark (Wal)