Maybe Leinster’s relative struggles in the second-half might not be the worst thing that ever happened to them, not least with next week’s heavyweight Champions Cup semi-final against Toulouse at the Aviva Stadium in mind. Certainly Leo Cullen, for one, believes his players will be benefit from their 23-14 quarter-final win over Leicester at his old Welford Road haunt. It was achieved on the back of a near perfect, 20-0 first-half display and altogether more uncomfortable second period. “We had really good intent in the first-half in attack and in defence,” said Cullen. “We put Tigers under a fair bit of pressure when they had the ball. In the second half they threw the kitchen sink at us. It didn’t feel comfortable in the second-half from our point of view but we’re delighted to get a win. “Credit to the guys, their attitude was good, but there are parts of our performance that can get a hell of a lot better. There was a bit of risk because some of our guys haven’t played for the last couple of weeks and were they going to be a little shy in terms of that battle hardened piece. “But we’ve got through to the next round and hopefully we’ll be in better shape going into next week. We’re going to be better next week. It’s such a massive challenge up against Toulouse, five times champions. Hopefully we’ll have a big crowd at the Aviva.” A meeting of the two most successful sides in the competition’s history offers Leinster the chance to take one step closer towards emulating the five stars which Toulouse have stitched on their jerseys after the latter’s dramatic penalty shoot-out win over Munster in the Aviva Stadium earlier in the day. “Toulouse look incredibly dangerous,” said Cullen. “Their halfbacks are two of the best players in the world at the moment. They have a big, powerful pack as well who get them on the front foot. They’re a very dangerous team and it’s an unbelievable challenge for our guys but that’s what we want. It’s a huge week ahead. Hopefully we’ll get a big crowd at the Aviva and we’ll need every bit of energy we can get from that. Plots As for stars, Jamison Gibson-Park’s all-embracing, compelling performance made him a shoo-in for star of the match, and as if there’s not enough plots and sub-plots in this semi-final match-up, his renewal of acquaintances with World Player of the Year Antoine Dupont will be up among the most eagerly anticipated. It actually wasn’t out of place when someone asked Cullen if he’d swap Dupont for Gibson-Park, nor was his understandable desire to stand by his man. “No, I’m very happy with our guys that we have. A lot of that Toulouse squad have won a Grand Slam with France. A lot of our Irish guys involved today will have played against France in the Six Nations over in Paris. It’s great for our guys to go up against their quality. “Jamison was excellent today. There was lots of variety to his game. He has a strong kicking game but also the ability to snipe, he made some really good breaks today. When he’s in the backfield he’s so comfortable in terms of open spaces. He had a really good game against a couple of very experienced halfbacks.” Angry Ellis Genge, being such a totemic figure for home team and crowd alike, was clearly targeted and largely becalmed by Leinster, whose defenders lined up in double tackles whenever he carried, and the “gutted” Leicester captain cut a dejected and angry figure afterwards. “The difference from the first half to the second half. From 20-0 down to win the second half 14-3 shows where we should have been at. They are a brilliant side and if you play like that in the first half against a team like that then you are going to get punished and then we had to chase the game. “It is hard to win from 20-0 down. We did not stop fighting. We did what we did all year for 40 minutes, I just wish we had done it for 80 minutes.” When asked how hard it was for Leicester to compete against a team with 13 internationals in its starting line-up, Genge retorted: “Look mate, I am not trying to be a prick here but I don’t want you saying that. We came out there and we fought as hard as we could. They have 13 internationals but don’t put us in that bracket of we gave it a good crack. “We could have won that game. I think you know that as well. If anyone is going to say that to me, please don’t because it is going to wind me right up. Our boys fought all game so I am not going to come here for someone to say we gave it a good crack and we’re plucky losers. “I am not having a pop but I am just saying please don’t say that to me.”