Police in New York state are treating as a racially-motivated hate crime the murder of ten people by a heavily-armed gunman at a supermarket in Buffalo on Saturday afternoon. Police said the gunman shot 11 black victims and two white before surrendering. An 18-year-old, identified in court as Payton Gendron of Conklin, New York, pleaded not guilty on Saturday evening to first-degree murder, a charge that could lead to life imprisonment without parole. At a news conference on Saturday, Erie County sheriff, John Garcia, called the shooting a “straight-up racially motivated hate crime”. Officials said the gunman, who opened fire at the grocery store in a predominantly black district in Buffalo, had broadcast the attack live on Twitch, the livestreaming site owned by Amazon that is popular with gamers. Twitch said it had taken the channel offline within two minutes of the violence starting. Officials said the gunman, who used an assault weapon, was wearing military-style tactical gear including a helmet. Buffalo police commissioner Joseph Gramaglia said the gunman shot four people outside the store, three fatally. Inside the store, a security guard who was a retired local police officer fired multiple shots at the attacker. However the commissioner said the rounds had been blocked by the body armour worn by the gunman. The gunman then killed the guard before moving through the store shooting other victims. Upon being confronted by police, the suspect had put the gun to his own neck before officers talked him into dropping the weapon. Sheriff Garcia said: “This was pure evil. It was straight up racially- motivated hate crime from somebody outside of our community, outside of the city of good neighbours... coming into our community and trying to inflict that evil upon us.” Conklin, where the suspect in the shooting grew up, is a town in New York more than 200 miles from Buffalo. John Flynn, Erie County district attorney said the gunman was not known to law enforcement agencies. He said there were pieces of evidence that indicate “racial animosity” on the part of the suspect, but he declined to elaborate. Investigators are reviewing a document they suspect was posted by the gunman which set out white supremacist motivations and ideology. The White House said US president Joe Biden had been briefed on the shootings by his homeland security adviser. “He will continue to receive updates….. as further information develops. The president and the first lady are praying for those who have been lost and for their loved ones.” New York governor Kathy Hochul said: “It is my sincere hope that this individual, this white supremacist who just perpetrated a hate crime on an innocent community, will spend the rest of his days behind bars. And heaven help him in the next world as well.”