Dell Technologies has extended its partnership with children’s charity Barnardos that sees the tech giant provide support for the charity’s core work. The five-year partnership has seen teams from Dell in Dublin, Cork and Limerick volunteer across a range of activities, from sharing expertise for an organisation-wide digital audit, to supporting the shift to virtual and hybrid working and social media monitoring for major campaigns. Training The extended partnership will see extra training, social media support and volunteer hours committed to the charity. It will also help create a new on-demand coding curriculum designed to help children accessing Barnardos services to develop their digital skills. The move builds on the success of the Code Work Clubs. “We are committed to supporting the communities we serve and our partnership with Barnardos is central to that promise. Since we came together five years ago, we’ve been amazed and inspired by the life changing work undertaken by Barnardos,” said Denis Lucey, vice president of EMEA infrastructure support service and site leader for Dell Technologies Dublin. “In extending our partnership, Dell Technologies can enable the children’s charity to have an even greater impact. Over the coming two years, Dell will work to expand the reach of our Code Work Clubs to ensure young people in the community can benefit from new coding skills and that we can play a role in addressing the digital divide that exists in many areas.” Support Barnardos said the ongoing support from Dell has helped children and families with 25,000 hours of family support and 600,000 meals. An extra €130,000 has been raised through virtual fundraising initiatives by Dell staff, and also helped increase the awareness of Barnardos’ work. “It’s been an incredible five years of partnership between Barnardos and Dell Technologies with transformational impact that will help make a real difference to the vulnerable children and families we work with, because childhood lasts a lifetime,” said Barnardos chief executive Suzanne Connolly. “We’re looking forward to another two years of support, working together to create a legacy of change.”