Green space in Dublin’s scenic Howth Castle Estate should be rezoned for a senior living community to help ward off “the next housing crisis”, its owner Tetrarch Capital has said. In a bid to develop a parcel of the land previously used as a golf course, the real estate investor has argued Howth is in drastic need of more suitable housing options for its ageing population. Facing pushback from the coastal community, it has set out its vision for a part of the area in a detailed submission to Fingal County Council’s draft development plan. “There is an enormous requirement for suitable accommodation for seniors in Ireland and, with a continuing lack of action in areas such as Howth and elsewhere, where the need is most obvious and greatest, this will become the next housing crisis,” it said. In advance of its submission filed this week, Tetrarch circulated key elements of its “masterplan” including an integrated retirement community and separate affordable housing - with units priced at less than €300,000 - in a brochure aimed at attracting local support for its rezoning bid. Other benefits outlined include the development of a public park, a green corridor linking Howth with the neighbouring suburb of Sutton, and a new hotel. But zoning for housing on parts of a sprawling 530 acre estate known for green spaces and golf courses, presents arguably its greatest challenge to redevelopment. The Howth Special Amenity Area Order (SAAO) encompasses 547 hectares of land but not, according to Tetrach, the site it intends for its retirement community. However, local Green Party councillor David Healy said it falls within the buffer zone, and dismissed the move as a speculative rezoning attempt. “I think it’s a terrible idea,” he said, while acknowledging local support for other aspects of the masterplan, notably the redevelopment of Howth Castle itself and a new hotel. Social Democrats TD Cian O’Callaghan has given voice to unease in the community that rezoning could pave the way for other future, unspecified development. A report on all submissions to the draft development plan (2023 to 2029) will be presented to elected representatives in July, followed by possible amendments in September. Submissions close on Thursday night, with about 365 filed as of midday. Local Independent councillor Jimmy Guerin said while he was not necessarily in favour of the rezoning, there was a need for debate around all aspects of the estate’s redevelopment. “The financial feasibility has to be taken into account and it may be necessary for the senior living to be considered as part of the plan,” he said, specifying potential zoning with set objectives. “I certainly won’t be opposing that until I hear the views of both planners and my colleagues.”