Johann van Graan’s tears pitch-side underlined the gut-wrenching nature of Munster’s defeat to Toulouse in losing a penalty shootout (4-2) after the teams could not be separated after first 80, and then 100 minutes in a thoroughly engrossing Heineken Champions Cup quarter-final at the Aviva stadium. The Munster head coach was still trying to wrangle his feelings as he tried to put into context what he had just witnessed. “Firstly, I’m incredibly proud. Today was what Munster rugby is about. To lose it like that, that’s unfortunately sport, that is the way the rules are. Somebody has got to kick it over and somebody’s got to miss. “If ever there’s a day to sum up Munster rugby, it’s today. A community of 40,000 people travelling. It was certainly one of the best rugby games I’ve been involved with. I said to my wife there from a feeling point of view, this was like the World Cup semi-final in 2015 that I was involved with that we lost 20-18 against the All Blacks. “That feeling that we gave it all we got, the players gave it all they’ve got. Management, staff, the people of Munster gave it all they’ve got. We’ve got to know that this is a game. Everybody associated with Munster rugby will be incredibly proud of the 23 guys that stood up and fought today. “All you can ask is that guys give it their all and that’s what they’ve done, to put us in a position to go against the European Champions, in a cauldron like that. Nobody on the pitch, not the referee, not Toulouse, have been in a situation like that. “We spoke in the week about the possibilities of extra-time, the number of tries, and we were prepared for it. It comes down to literally a kick. A horrible way for the game to end from a Munster perspective, but Toulouse are one of the true great European clubs, all credit to them. Munster and Toulouse are two incredibly special clubs to be involved with. “The tough thing is, (it was) a great game of rugby, could have won it in the final play of the game, had one or two opportunities, but it’s gone now. The sun will come up tomorrow morning.”