Uncomfortable Romain Ntamack, a crucial and try-scoring figure in Toulouse’s quarter-final win over Munster admitted that he thought he had won the penalty kick shootout after his first success to put the French club 3-2 ahead, forgetting temporarily that it was best of six-kicks. He explained: “I knew that we kicked on the sides but I believed that there were the first three kicks and, if that was tied then we went (to) the 40 metres (mark). But apparently not,” he laughed. “When I raised my arms, I saw that no one was moving. I was a little uncomfortable, especially vis-à-vis Munster (players and supporters). I thought it was over and apologised to (their) players at the end.” It was noticeable that Ntamack and Carbery chatted a little while they awaited their turn during the shootout. The French outhalf explained the conversation. “Yes, we talked a bit about our feelings about the match. Then we also congratulated each other because ending on penalties meant that the match was close until the end. “I wished him good luck, too. Then I tried to stay in my bubble, to ignore the context and the issue, to tell myself that we had hit penalties hundreds of times. “No, there wasn’t much strength left (to celebrate). And then there was the respect for Munster and their home crowd, who were very respectful during the penalty shootout and the game in general. We could have been in their place. We were happy but we didn’t need to exult or do too much. We haven’t won anything yet.” The next step on that journey is a return to Dublin next weekend and a mouth-watering clash with Leinster. Ntamack concluded: “We’re not going to think too much about it right away. The bodies are quite bruised. “Everyone needs to recover because next weekend is still going to be very tough. The week is, I think, going to be based on analysis and recovery, more than training.” By the numbers 1 - Take a moment to watch a try from London Irish replacement Henry Arundell in the European Challenge Cup quarter-final against Toulon. Quite simply it is one of the best individual tries of all time, a stunning 90 metre plus effort from a 19-year-old star in the making, who is coveted by Ireland, England and Wales for whom he is reported to qualify. He is currently an England Under-20 international but if he does, as alleged, have Irish qualifications then Andy Farrell might fancy making a phone call. Common bond Toulouse, Leicester Tigers and Leinster, all of whom were in Champions Cup action on Saturday share a common bond when it comes to playing in knockout matches in the tournament that have no winner after the 80-minutes. The French Top 14 club, whose 4-2 win over Munster in the penalty kick shootout after the teams were level 24-24 after full time, extra time and in terms of tries scored which is the first point of reference when play finishes to determine a winner, have experienced heartbreak before. In the 1997-1998 European Cup semi-final, Toulouse lost on try count (2-1) after their game against Brive finished 22-22 at full-time. The nature of their win over Munster is only the second time that a European knockout game has been decided by penalty kicks. In 2008-2009, under a different format, the Tigers beat Cardiff 7-6 in a semi-final at the Millennium Stadium. Players took one kick each and with the scores at 4-4 it went to sudden death. Leicester number eight, Jordan Crane, who once played in goal for West Brom under-14s, kicked the winning penalty. Leinster’s involvement relates to yet another semi-final (2014-2015) at the Stade Velodrome in Marseilles, the venue for this year’s final, when they were pipped 25-20 by Toulon after that match went to extra time. Quote of the week – An emotional Munster head coach Johann van Graan summed up his team’s performance in what was his last European game in charge before moving to Bath in the summer Noble journey James Small-Edwards, the son of France defence coach Shaun, has been elected as a Labour councillor for the city of Westminster council in London. The 25-year-old politician, who previously played rugby for Wasps, was successful in the Bayswater ward during Thursday’s British local elections. Small-Edwards, who also has a famous mother in Moving On Up singer Heather Small, wrote on Twitter: “Absolutely delighted to have won Bayswater from the Conservatives, turning the ward red for the first time since the 1980s. Thanks so much to my family, friends and fellow candidates for all the love and support over the past few months!” Shaun had previously said of his son’s decision to go into politics. “I think it’s a noble journey, to make anywhere in the country a better place to live for people.”