A month ago Katie Taylor was already a living legend in this country. But now, after headlining a packed-out Madison Square Garden in New York City, the Bray woman has indisputably become one of history’s sporting greats. As this paper’s Malachy Clerkin succinctly summed up, Ms Taylor has “changed everything”. “You look at her and you think of all that has happened, of how every step was more unlikely than the one before, and of how she made them all seem inevitable. She did it. Lucky us, to be around while she did.” Ms Taylor herself has admitted that her fight against Amanda Serrano was “the best night of my career”. “I wasn’t sure if anything could reach my Olympic gold medal moment but tonight was absolutely the best moment of my career,” told the press conference following the fight. So how did 35-year-old Ms Taylor reach such sporting heights? And what’s next for this undisputed boxing champion? Asked last week about a rematch with Ms Serrano, Ms Taylor said a match in Dublin’s Croke Park would be “phenomenal”. But professional boxing has been “non-existent” in Dublin since the Regency Hotel shooting in 2016, Irish Times sports writer Johnny Watterson told In the News. There are lots of reasons why the Croke Park fight should happen, first and foremost because most Irish people have never seen Ms Taylor fight, Watterson said. “She will be 36 in July, she’s not going to go on forever and there seems to be a bit of energy behind this Croke Park event now, but there are reasons why it would be difficult. Partly, the reasons boxing has faced since 2016 because of the Regency hotel, and also partly because who is going to pay for it?” On today’s In the News podcast, we take a look back at Katie Taylor’s unstoppable rise to boxing glory, tracking her steps from Bray right up to Madison Square Garden, and ask, can the undisputed champion of the world bring professional boxing back to Dublin? In the News is presented by reporters Sorcha Pollak and Conor Pope. Listen to the podcast here: APPLE SPOTIFY RSS ACAST