Irish-headquartered waste and recycling management software group AMCS has agreed a deal to buy German company Quentic for an undisclosed sum. Connected to that acquisition, Clearlake Capital Group is making a new equity investment in AMCS alongside new equity investments from existing investors Insight Partners, Ireland Strategic Investment Fund (ISIF), and Highland Europe. The acquisition, which must be approved by regulators, will broaden AMCS’s environmental software offering and increase its customer base. Founded by Markus Becker, Sebastian Mönnich and Hardy Menzel in 2007, Quentic - formerly known as EcoIntense – provides a software as a service solution to manage processes related to environmental, health, safety, and quality management (EHSQ) as well as corporate responsibility-related areas in environment, social and governance (ESG). The acquisition will AMCS a combined 4,000 customers and more than 1,000 employees. Run rate revenues are expected to exceed €180 million by the end of the year. “AMCS and Quentic are very aligned with the mission to drive an environmentally sustainable future”, says Jimmy Martin, chief execuitve of Limerick-based AMCS. Future “A net zero carbon future depends on a very connected and circular approach across the supply chain. We are thrilled to bring the technology from Quentic into the AMCS portfolio of solutions and can now move forward with a focus on influencing the entire supply chain, offering smarter outcomes from automating and digitising their businesses - reducing waste as much as possible.” Once the deal is approved. AMCS and Quentic will be able to provide more advanced digital solutions to a wider industry, bringing customers a range of solutions to increase efficiencies and streamline their operation. “We have built Quentic on the values of making a meaningful contribution to people, society and the environment, ”Markus Becker, chief executive of Quentic said. “Therefore, we are excited to have found a partner in AMCS who fully aligns with our mission to digitally empower companies across the globe to manage people, business and environmental processes sustainably at all levels. Together with AMCS, the Quentic management team will continue to shape the future.”