Almost as soon as the fight was over on Saturday night, the talk was of a rematch between two world champions, Katie Taylor and Amanda Serrano. The intense Madison Square Garden contest between 35-year-old Taylor and 33-year-old Serrano ended with an extraordinary final-round climax, bringing the sold-out 19,185 crowd to its feet. In the first time a women’s contest was headlined by female boxers, Taylor was called the winner with two of the three judges scoring the contest in her favour in a split decision. One judge gave the fight to Serrano 96-94 and the two others scored it to Taylor 97-93, 96-93, allowing her retain her undisputed world lightweight title. Because of how close the fight was and the intensity and support inside Madison Square Garden, speculation was immediate about a rematch in Dublin. Croke Park was the named venue with both sides agreeing that Ireland seemed the natural next move if it can be arranged. That could cause some shifting in seats in Leinster House. Because of reported issues around the problem of acquiring insurance for boxing events in Dublin, there have been none since a fatal shooting took place in The Regency Hotel in early 2016 at a boxing weigh-in. World attention Nobody has fully explained the exact details of the disqualifying issues but with world attention now focusing on Ireland for what would be certain to be a hugely attended event with global television coverage, Dublin as a no-go boxing destination could come under the spotlight. “We thought Amanda won but that was the fight of a lifetime,” said Jake Paul, the 25-year-old American YouTube celebrity and promoter of Serrano. “That was Arturo Gatti vs Micky Ward. Both women fought their hearts out. It’s a historic night. Kudos to Katie Taylor for what she has done for women’s boxing. And let’s run it back like Eddie [Hearn] said. September, October. The second fight just got a whole lot better.” Taylor’s promoter Hearn was equally vociferous about any rematch taking place in Ireland. Taylor rarely competed in Ireland as an amateur and has never fought there since turning professional after the Olympic Games in Rio 2016. “Katie Taylor is one of the greatest things to ever come out of Ireland,” said Hearn. “If we don’t go back to Ireland for a fight before her career is done, it will be a big, big, big shame. “I think we should run this rematch back in Ireland. Let Katie Taylor for the first time back in Croke Park. We’ll see what happens. We’ll talk to Jake but tonight forget me, forget Jake. It’s about these two women. What a credit to the sport.” Paul was also asked if Serrano wanted to go to Ireland. “One hundred per cent,” he said. “She’s a true champion. Wherever, whenever. Clearly the Irish fans are mad so we got some unsettled business.”