A student from Dublin has been named the overall winner of the 2022 Press Pass young journalism awards. Kate Lynch, from the Institute of Education, claimed the top prize as student journalist of the year for her interview with the new provost of Trinity College Dublin. More than 10,000 transition year students took part in the annual NewsBrands Ireland Press Pass initiative, with 19 prizes awarded to recognise their original journalism. The programme was launched 10 years ago and seeks to improve news literacy and critical thinking skills among students. Trophies were awarded in news reporting, features, opinion journalism, sports writing, school newspaper and photojournalism. The winners were selected by a panel of editors and journalists, chaired by Michael Foley, professor emeritus of journalism at Technological University Dublin. In his citation for the overall prize, Mr Foley said the winning piece “clearly understood” that an interview was about more than just getting answers to questions, but also about the small details that bring the story to life. Colm O’Reilly, chairman of Newsbrands Ireland, said the aim of the awards was to encourage the next generation of journalists. “We want to foster a love and curiosity of current affairs. The most important thing for me is newspapers are the genesis of the ecosystem of news. They are the key to the thing you see so often in other media,” he said. “News stories have the ability to change society for the better. They change laws, they connect communities and they call the truth to power.” Speaking at the awards ceremony, Minister for Media Catherine Martin said it was really “uplifting” to see the impact the programme has had on so many young people. “I have nothing but admiration for the work you have all put into the programme. The subject matters you have chosen to focus on are diverse, interesting and topical,” she said. “In the area of disinformation, we must foster the development of the skills necessary to interrogate and to deal with the constant and sometimes overwhelming volume of information that we are faced with on a daily basis.” She added: “I’m absolutely confident that your generation will be one of innovation and trendsetters.” Winners News 1st- Seán Kenefick, Pobalscoil na Trionoide, Youghal 2nd - Aoife Nic Chinnéide Pobalscoil Chorcha Dhuibhne, Dingle 3rd - Emily Nic Gearailt Pobalscoil Chorca Dhuibhne, Dingle Opinion 1st - Catherine Brennan Presenation secondary school, Wexford 2nd - Felix Somers, presentation secondary school, Wexford 3rd - Nanette McCartney, Millstreet Community school, Co Cork Sports 1st - Sophie O’Reilly, St Aloysius College, Carrigtwohill, Co Cork 2nd - Aoibhe Horan, presentation secondary school, Milltown, Co Kerry 3rd - Lauren Barrett- Melleney, St Mary’s secondary school, Macroom Newspaper 1st - The Pres Release - Presentation De La Salle 2nd - Boyne Bi Monthly, Fingal community college, Dublin 3rd - The paper - Moyne community school, Co Longford Photojournalism 1st - Tia Kenneally, Blackwater Community School, Co Waterford 2nd - Jake Sparks, presentation secondary school, Milltown, Co Kerry 3rd - Ellie Ní Mhuirgheasa, Gaelscoil na Tríonóide, Youghal, Co Cork Features 1st - Gemma Hannon, Colaiste Muire, Ennis 2nd - Fearne Morrissey, Institute of Education 3rd - Kerrie Ní Bheaglaoich, Colaiste Iosagain, Dun Laoghaire Overall winner - student journalist of the year Kate Lynch, The Institute of Education, Dublin 2