Drogheda United 1 Shamrock Rovers 0 Drogheda United produced the shock of the season to date as they condemned champions Shamrock Rovers to defeat at Head In The Game Park. It was a local hero, albeit one that Rovers were all too familiar with, that earned the points. Ryan Brennan has enjoyed a productive campaign to date at his hometown club. He struck his fourth goal in just his fourth start altogether to send Rovers crashing to first defeat in 13 league outings. Sam Long, United’s on-loan Scotland Under 21 goalkeeper, was again in inspired form throughout a first half in which Drogheda repelled everything Rovers threw at them. That was before they struck themselves to lay the groundwork for a result few, even the most diehard Drogs, could have predicted beforehand. Long produced a stunning flying save to keep out Danny Mandroiu’s top corner-bound free kick. Andy Lyons and Dylan Watts then contrived to play the striker in but his effort was saved by the outstanding Long. Matters worsened for Stephen Bradley when, as was the case against UCD last Thursday, Jack Byrne was forced to retire before half-time through injury. Brennan, a former Shamrock Rovers player, scored his fourth goal of an efficient season to hand Drogheda a surprise lead 10 minutes before the interval. Dayle Rooney outpaced Barry Cotter and delivered a pinpoint cross. Brennan arrived in timely fashion and expertly planted a header beyond Alan Mannus. Rovers probing in the second half amounted to little, bar Sean Hoare’s powerful header which was off-target and a wayward effort from Mandroiu. He was shown a second yellow card late on. The game was delayed late on after assistant referee Allen Lynch appeared to have been struck with an object thrown from the stand housing the travelling supporters. Drogheda United: Long; Poynton, Cowan, Massey (Rooney, 9), Weir; Heeney, Deegan, Clarke, Brennan (Williams, 86); Grimes; Lyons (Foley, 78). Shamrock Rovers: Mannus; Gannon, Hoare, Grace; Cotter (O’Neill, 61), Watts, Towell (Greene, 61), Lyons; Byrne (Burke, 41); Mandroiu, Gaffney (Emakhu, 70). Referee: Ray Matthews