Overriding the Brexit deal on Northern Ireland would be an act of “bad faith” by the UK government and would send “the wrong message,” a high-ranking US Democrat has said. Congressman Richard Neal, chairman of an influential US congressional committee, said on a visit to Dublin there were “still room” to negotiate a settlement to the dispute between the European Union and United Kingdom over the implementation of the Northern Ireland protocol. Mr Neal, chairman of the US House of Representatives ways and means committee, is leading a congressional delegation on visit to the Republic and Northern Ireland this week amid heightened tensions between the EU and UK over the 2019 deal that covers post-Brexit trading rules in Northern Ireland. The agreement avoided imposing a new trade and customs border on the island of Ireland following the UK’s exit from the EU by placing checks between Northern Ireland and Britain, a move Unionists say damages Northern Ireland’s economy and undermines its place in the UK. The British government said last week it was planning to introduce legislation in the coming weeks that would unilaterally scrap parts of the protocol, citing the opposition of the Democratic Unionist Party, which is refusing to form a new Northern Irish power-sharing government. “The key word is planning and that means that there’s still room for negotiation and certainly the position that European Union has taken and America has taken is: let’s proceed to negotiation,” Mr Neal told The Irish Times in an interview during the delegation’s visit. The top Democrat, a key ally of US president Joe Biden, said the issues at dispute over the protocol were “relatively small” compared with the challenges overcome with the signing of the 1998 Belfast Agreement, Northern Ireland’s landmark peace deal. Mr Neal said “the path discovered 24 years ago” to reach that agreement was “imminently relevant at the moment” to finding a resolution to the dispute over the protocol. “Good faith is the key phrase. I think men and women of not only good faith but goodwill embrace the idea that we have to find a settlement,” said Mr Neal. He said he believed that some of the concern around the protocol was “out of proportion” given that only a small minority of voters in Northern Ireland cast their vote in the recent Assembly elections based on the protocol when other issues superseded discussion about it. “This is the time to get on with government. An election campaign is part of forming a government. That has been done and accomplished. Now it’s time to go into governance, which is, by the way, the real challenge,” he said. Mr Neal, whose congressional committee signs off on any trade deals with the US, said there should be flexibility shown by both the EU and the UK to find a solution to how the protocol is implemented but warned that unilateral action by the UK government would raise questions about its motives. “If there are instructions that would improve the protocol, they should be fully embraced. Confidence is very key here,” he said. “But I don’t think that there ought to be an arbitrary decision to abandon the protocol without negotiation. I think abrogating an international treaty is not only bad faith but it sends considerably the wrong message.” Asked what that message was, Mr Neal said: “It suggest that expediency takes place overall, including international agreements. International agreements are based upon not just the signing of the document, but the fact that everybody has to find a path forward.” The DUP has criticised Mr Neal and the nine-strong US delegation, made up of Democrats and Republicans, for having a “one-sided” and partisan view of Northern Ireland. Unionists and the British government argue that the protocol puts the Belfast Agreement at risk. Mr Neal said he did not believe there was any risk to the peace agreement. “I wouldn’t want the spotlight placed on me for fracturing or trying to abandon the Good Friday Agreement. It’s a template for international achievement,” he said. “American presidents, regardless of party, and members of Congress, regardless of party, have fully embraced it, as have the European Union members, as have a majority of people in the North and in the Republic of Ireland.” Ahead of travelling to Northern Ireland on Wednesday, the delegation is meeting President Michael D. Higgins on Tuesday and attending lunch at the Department of Foreign Affairs hosted by Minister Simon Coveney. Mr Neal will later meet businesses in a round-table discussion with the American Chamber of Commerce Ireland before he addresses the Seanad on Tuesday afternoon.